Children youth and families committee will come to order today. We have a hearing on House Bill, 5237 and executive session on to something else. We're going to do the executive session first and those two bills are 5118 and 5122. There are amendments to brief so long. I would like to ask Luke to brief us on the Amendments. For each legislation, programs are members of the committee, the 1st of those two bills 5118 as the committee will recall. This bill relates to re-entry subjects, including wage Unity facilities, defining those as essential public facilities for purposes of exciting and a few other things. The the amendment to that bill off.509 it specifies, that the department of children youth and families. Instead of the Department of Commerce, may not attempt to cite those new community facilities in Eastern Washington. Unless there's an equal, or greater number of Western Washington sites and makes references to those Community facilities, consistent with other job references. Used in that section. I I'd characterize these changes as technical changes. Thank you. Any questions on that Amendment? in none, okay, and now, for 5122 And again there for amendments to 5122. This is the bill relating to juvenile court jurisdiction. Creating the raised the age of Justice, task, force, and modifying the age of capacity for children. And the first of those amendments. Wickham 507, regards to the capacity part of the bill, the age of capacity and it modifies the age at which a child is incapable of committing, a crime to specify the children under age 11. So 10 and younger, instead of under age, thirteen, as the Bill calls for are incapable of committing crime. And children ages, eight through ten, who are charged with a serious violent, offense, or rape and second-degree are presumed incapable, but that presumption can be rebutted. It also specifies that youth courts have authority over juveniles age, 11 through 17, instead of 13 through 17 and makes other changes that are connecting with those age specifications. The next Amendment we can 506 it restores current Law related to the age of capacity for children. So it removes the changes that the underlying Bill makes to that section and then modifies the task force that's created in the bill to Thursday renamed, as the juvenile court, jurisdiction task force and includes within that task forces duties, the responsibility to provide recommendations related to the age of capacity and and presumed in capacity for children committing crime and makes changes to the exact language consistent with those changes. The next Amendment we can 505 it adds. A number of people to the boss is the age. Juvenile Justice, task force. It requires that task force to take into consideration research and case law regarding adolescent, brain development home and make recommendations regarding expansion of juvenile. Court jurisdiction to include ages above 19 years of age. It also requires that, that task force report, include anticipated, County and state facility changes and modifications, including a timeline or planning needed to successfully expand. Juvenile court jurisdiction. And then moving on to the final Amendment Wickham, 508 that Amendment expands the circumstances in which the presumption that children ages 8 through 12 are incapable of committing crime, may be rebutted. So the the underlying bill says that that those dead people of those ages are presumed incapable, but that can be rebutted only in circumstances where those children are charged with murder one or murder too. And the amendment expands to include serious violent, offences, or rape, in the second degree. Thank you. Any questions for Luke on these amendments? I want question is order in the debrief. Them is that the order that the bill that the Amendments will be offered in June? Line, they go by Page and line numbers. So they're ordered in that way, instead of by the number of the amendment. Wonderful. Well, thank you very much. So we are not going to go at ease for caucus representative Dent, 15 minutes. Going back at 10:20. Does that sound good? And 20 minutes. Sounds perfect. Okay, so call me back at 10:25. Or just kind of pointy work the same for 10:20 and 10:45. Okay. Well, we'll start at 10:25. So it will only be five minutes late when we get back to 10:30 and 25 will get started. Thank you back to order. The children youth and families committee back to order. We are moving to Executive session on Two Bills. By one. One eight thousand. 5122 Madam. Vice chair Araceli. Thank you chairperson. I move that Senate and gross in a bill. I believe 50. 1018 be reported out of committee, the do pass recommendation. It has been moved and seconded that engrossed substitute Senate, Bill 5118, be moved out of committee with a do pass recommendation. There are amendments and I move Wickham 509. This amendment is simply a correction to indicate that it's the department of children youth and Families versus the Department of Commerce who would be doing the function listed in the bill in this portion of the bill urge your support. Additional remarks. Okay, all those in favor of Wickham 509. Please indicate by saying your name and I representative said off the Slick dance. I those opposed. The amendment is adopted not a vice-chair. Sheriff said I moved that engrossed Senate substitute. Bill off 512 to be reported out of committee with a do pass recommendation. It has been moved and seconded and engrossed. Substitute Senate bill. Be incorporated with the Striking Amendment and that the engrossed substitute Senate. Bill be passed out of committee with a do pass recommendation. Do we get that right off? I just want to clarify that. We're the committee is moving forward with and gross substitute Senate, Bill 118. And, and not yet on 512. Mm. That was my fault. I was the wrong part. Thank you. Okay. So yes, we're moving forward, and grow substitutes in about 5 1, 8 with the amount incorporate into a striking Amendment. All right, final passage represented Ortiz help. Thank you, madam chair. I think the the name of this bill says that all it is about re-entry, trying to tackle the the little things that make a big difference to a successful re-entry, things like healthcare birth. It's like resolving their warrant before they leave the facility. Any other warrants before? They leave their facilities. These are the kinds of things that can help them be more successful and I urge a. Yes, vote. Thank you. Additional remarks. Represent. Thank you very much here. So, we have some concerns with this bill and I, I have to say, I truly absolutely appreciate the intent of of the bill and off, that's heard. But we, we have some concerns with the bill and the concerns come to the laws. We only put on our some of our local jurisdictions with unfunded mandates. So I guess, for the month. We don't have to be an on this side, until we can be resolved, some of our issues with that. So thank you. Madam chair. Okay represent cooker. Thank you, ma'am. I'm I'm page three section subsection, C starting online 35, and talks about Department, may not attempt to cite new community residential facilities east of the crest of the Cascade Mountains unless there's equal or greater numbers cited on the west side. And so in my personal opinion, I would rather have that wording say that if the department can show reason why that should happen. I would totally support that but there could be a valid reason of why life, maybe it's cost or maybe it's convenience or something that the east side is working better for this. The children and the citizens of state of Washington so long that one section is the reason why I will be voting. No, because there could be some reasons why they Department could tell us, it's in the best interest to continue with method of practice. So thank you madam chair for allowing me to speak, to it, to her. Thank you representing Clipper and I do think that the originally the intent with this, it was a clarification Amendment Senate, was to ensure that the west side doesn't rely only on these facilities and the east side and that we we take some of that responsibility on our side of the mountains as well. That you make very valid point obviously as well. Okay. Well look, please call the roll. Yes. Representative cin-cin, bowtie representative sample. Thai representative Harris telling. Representative Harris, Tali, bow, tie, representative Harris, Tali bow, tie, representative rule, representative rule vote. I representative rule vote. I representative denge. Dem folks name without recommendation, representative Dent, Philips name, without recommendation representative Chase. Representative Chase boats know, without recommendation representative Chase. Folks know without recommendation, representative McCaslin represent Roman Catholic votes, May without recommendation. Representative McCaslin votes name, without recommendation representative Carolyn. Resume Callen. Puts a representative Callen votes. I representative Eslick. Representative s like bumps Nae without recommendation representative s like boats name without recommendation representative Goodwin. Those are representative Goodman votes. I represent of clipper. Thank you. Luka representative Clipper votes, Naidu, not pass representative Clifford boats, and they do not pass representative or to yourself. Representative or two cellphones, I'd representative or to South votes. I representative Wicks, and it avoids votes. I representative Wicks votes. I bought a representative Young. Young no, do not pass. Representative young votes. No, do not pass. Does anybody wish to change their vote? Looking at the sheet. Would anybody like to change a rope? In semen liquid, please report the tally. I'm sure there are seven. I-690 excused, rabson by your boat. Engrossed. Substitute Senate Bill five. 118 passes a committee. Thank you. We're all now. Move on to 5122 Madam, Vice chair, Harris Kelly. Thank you. Chair said. I moved that and grossed. Engrossed substitute Senate. Bill 2512 to be reported out of committee with a do pass recommendation. It has been moved and seconded that engrossed substitute Senate Bill 512 to be moved out of committee with a do pass recommendation. There are amendments representative human human. I'm sure we can 507. Welcome 507, has been moved and seconded remarks representative Young. They've been here. I do have some concerns with the bill, given my experience growing up on the streets. But I, I would like to think that all of us have some experience with regard to age children at these ages but it seems wholly inappropriate to me. And I think anti-common sense. I mean, that with the most respect I think that this is if we continue to ratchet up the age at which kids are not held accountable. We are number one increasing the risk. Not, they're not going to that. We're denying their ability or recognizing their competence to stand for these types of the issues, but we're also increasing the opportunity for these kids to be manipulated the gang life that I saw. Started around the age of ten and it is not beyond the reason of a realm of reasonability or common sense that kids are going to be recruited weather in a trailer park or trailer park where we saw. You listed parents, running around doing things with our neighborhood. Kids getting in to do things for them, young impressionable kids. And again, we're talking about young impressionable kids, but we're setting up an environment. Not only that's going to hurt them. That other people are going to prowl upon the can take advantage of them. But on the streets with gangs this is going to be a gang recruitment tool. If we allow four of these children, not to be held accountable up to the age of Thirteen. And so, I am trying to lower the age here. I'll make a note to To our staff. That if, if we don't take it now, I'd love to actually lower it from under the age of ten. That was my intent. I read the read the bill wrong with the draft from when they originally proposed it, but I think if we're going to try to protect our kids which I believe that the sponsors are magnanimous. They trying to do with the bill, then we need amendments like this to protect them. Not only does the slower, the age, but it also brings up other crimes. I can tell you what I'll save speech for my for my next minute, but I really do believe that we need to lower these ages here. Not only for the sake of the kids and recognize the fact that they do have cognition of right and wrong, but also took them from illicit adult behavior that would seek to take advantage of them. So I recommend yes, but thank. Thank you. Representing young representative works. Thank you, madam chair. I'm a respectfully, requesting an oval on this amendment, and we've discussed this before in terms of incarceration, and especially as it relates to juvenile justice system, but to really help offenders and our communities, we need to focus on the person and not the crime and this could not be more important when we're talking about youth with brains that are just not fully developed well into their mid twenties. And we're looking at these children at this stage, we would see that. They're, they're all traumatized children and not the overlap of the child welfare system. And down those two scores is really evident in these situations. And in clinical terms, when we're addressing this Behavior, we're we're talking about reactive Behavior or even sexually, reactive Behavior kids that are saved. We acting out and the criminal justice system doesn't do anything to treat these behaviors that we're seeing in our children. So we're not saying that these are not very concerning behaviors that we need to deal with right away. You know, that, but we need to help these children rehabilitate to live there a full life. After this is happening without continuing down a road or down a life of reoffending and recidivism wage. So I appreciate the intent intent of this amendment. I don't think that this amendment was just closer to where we want to be. And again, I'm recommending a no vote. Thank you. Thank you. Represent Works any additional remarks. Represent. Thank you, madam chair. And I just want to reiterate what represented young said with this amendment. I think it's a good amendment. I think it's, you know, I understand the brain development, I do home, but I also understand right from wrong. And I think this is a good amendment to support. I think it's the right way to go and somewhere. We need to hold our kids, certain amount of accountability and in their act action home, so I would, I would ask for a yes. Thank you. Thank you, Barb London, representative Harris Kelly. Thank you chairperson. And I, I want to thank Representatives young for sharing your lived experience in your consideration of this amendment. I also respectfully request off. No on this amendment. I think you bring up an excellent point representative young, that often these young people who we find in these sorts of behaviors are coerced off by adults and it's actually the coercion of those adults. And the accountability on those adults when we should be putting our emphasis, not on young people, who we know are susceptible because of that brain development. I would like to see an increase of us also addressing some of what you experienced, as a young person, so I don't want any young person to experience what you experienced certainly and it's something that is important for my district. But what we need to do is address the true folks who are causing these sorts of behaviors and not hold you accountable for adults. Bad behavior. Thank you. Thank you. I was on Harris. Highly represented Castle. Yes, Madam chair. Thank you. You know, our juvenile facilities are are designed to to rehabilitate these these Youth and if they're if they're not doing that then we we really need to address that and I think just off my ears is a as a as a public school teacher. I've seen kindergarteners know very well and off and it could actually be held accountable when they certainly not doing these kinds of crimes, but but you know, doing wrong and they knew very well when when gently confronted. And so I think this is a good men entire just passing. Representing goodness. Like a voucher in opposition to this amendment. There's a difference between accountability and culpability and children of this young age. You really should do not understand the consequences of their actions nor would I argue fully understand right from wrong. Particularly when they are subject to negative peer influences and where they are only engaged in short-term thinking have no impulse control. And the accountability that we seek in this new approach is a wraparound rather than a punitive approach which the record has clearly shown has only made it worse for these young children, whose brains then hardened bolts, literally the wiring of the brain when they are punished hardens, them into the fight or flight response and ruins the rest of their lives. We need to wrap around these children, irrespective of behavior that might have been harmful to others and set them on a path that allows them to to live much a successful lives. Thank you, resent Goodman. And thank you representing the council for your remarks as well. Didn't mean to not say that, I'll write all those in favor of Wickham 507. Please indicate by saying your name and I I'm sending you. Those wishing to vote name. Please. Say your name and Nae, representative gave me the amendment is not carried. Madam. There are additional amendments represent Amendment. 506 representing Clifford. Thank you, madam. Chair, I move adoption of the amendment with them. 506 has been moved and seconded remarks representing Clifford. Thank you, madam, chair referring to my notes off and and quite kind of like a little bit confused, cuz it used to be Wick 506. Now, it's Wickham 506, but that's besides the point. So we'll just leave that alone. Anyway, the first bullet point, there was a restore, scroll all related to the age at which children are incapable or M presumed of incapable of committing crime. Changes the name of the task force to the juvenile court jurisdiction. Task force from the the title of the bill, which is raised the age. Juvenile Justice task force. And the third bullet point is modifies, the intent language to consider amending the jurisdiction of juvenile, court jurisdiction to include uses young ages, thirteen to nineteen, rather than simply amending. So, put some ads, word, consider that so Madam chair. The way I handled this as a school resource officer and along. First Master is, when I came across these cases, I worked together with my prosecuting attorney's office and we we established or actually they helped me establish. It was the attorneys in the prosecutor's office who wrote it and it was as a series of ten questions for these juveniles to establish, you know, of course after re-reading them, their Miranda rights and having a counselor or principal authors. Teacher in the room with them or even a parent, these ten questions. Did you understand what you were doing was wrong? As you know, whenever told you before it, what you were doing was wrong. And so we go through these ten questions, that would be a part of my entire police report so that the Prosecutors Office could make a decision. If in fact with this child understood, if they knew what they were doing was right or wrong. So to race, simply raise the age carte blanche, I think, is way way way too far on this, because currently a law enforcement officers are working with the prosecuting attorneys are working with their school counselors and their teachers and their principles in the best interests of these children in the entire School. Children student body. So I think that this is a good amendment. I think it's what's best for our schools, entire Public Safety of our children. So I commend the amendment. You Thank you, represent. Clippert. I'm going to ask respectfully for a no vote on this amendment. The original Bill did have the the older age coming on life, but that was immediately. But that was changed to a task force on the younger and which this would also collapse into a task force. I believe we have the information on brain development and on available other options for these youth that. I don't think we need to study that any further. And so I'm going to ask for a no vote. And the additional remarks. Seeing none, all those in favor of Wickham 506, please say your name and I am opposed to the amendment. Do you say your name and Nae representative having anything in moment is not carried. There are additional amendments. I'm a Wiccan 505 So this amendment does a few things, it charges. The are asked the task force to consider a facility issues when they are looking at issues beyond the current seventeen-year-olds. And it makes some changes in that membership of that group, to make sure it's a more diverse group or looking considering those issues. And and that given current case, law recent case law. And what we know about brain development, it encourages that task force to look at all of that, as well as they're considering ages on, just 18 or 19, but possibly above that, especially given the musky decision, that talked about brain development, and I'm a twenty year olds as well. So with that I answered. Yes, vote. Less you represent that. Thank you, madam chair. So and I do appreciate your intent here again. I'm concerned that we're just stretching this out to over and over children. Thumb not to be held accountable for what they do. And and I'm I'm very concerned. And you know what, I have to draw on with many of the things that we we deal with in this committee or the legislature just my life experience. And I, I'm struggling with saying that they, they don't understand and they don't know how to handle this. And, and as I as I kind of read through this amendment home, I'm just concerned that we're just going to go a little bit too far. We're going to include juvenile court jurisdiction, include age, nineteen, and possibly above, you know, that's just too far out there for me. I mean, wage age, their children, or, or become we consider them adults when they're eighteen and they're, they're allowed to vote, or they can go into the military and they can fight for our freedoms, and they can do a lot of birth. And I think we have to decide where we are as a society, and we need to be teaching some accountability. And we could teach that one. There are five and six and seven, eight years old and it's not we're not going to harden them by doing that. We're just going to give them Direction. So anyway, I'm urging a no vote on this amendment. Thank you, man. Thank you. The additional remarks seeing none, all those in favor of Wickham 505. Please say your name and I thought I was probably both those opposed. Please say your name and Nae song with your boat. Wickham 505 is adopted additional. Amendments represent of young. Remove a minute. By the way. I meant Wickham 508 has been moved in. Second egg, remarks represent young. Thank you, ma'am, cheer. I'm also very concerned with regard to the types. If, if we're going to say that the children are incapable of committing a crime, but we're going to allow for it for first and second, a murder. There are a number of other crimes that I believe we should be including in this kids know what they're doing here and they they should know and even I believe if we need, you know, I'm trying to listen intently obviously disagree with a number of the counter points that are being made on some of these issues. But please hear me on this. There are a number of logical traps here wage were playing on. Kids were going to be I believe are going to be exploited to to hurt these kids. If we don't at least put into law that some actions whether you believe or not Thursday, Child is capable of knowing right and wrong in these areas. If we don't put some in law, some actions are Beyond reproach and you're going to be held accountable for them. Even if you had matured fully, you still need to recognize that. That is a place. You don't go. And I believe some of those include the rape of other people. I can tell you at the age of in Elementary School, third grade, second grade running around the streets with other street gang. Kids, the topics of taken advantage of a girl pulling down. Her boss is trying to get inside someone's pants. Those are all things that are cognitively discussed among these. These kids my age in either at the playground or in the local park across the street and in every one of the kids and these topic and you start got circles, knew that such was wrong and yet they still pursued these things off in the thought that some young girl or some young boy could be raped by a little bit older. A young girl or boy is a real fear that I have for my kids and I have for all of your kids and any of our constituent kids and to say that we would we would create a class that says it's in a job as new capable of doing such a heinous act and doesn't know that such a thing would be right or wrong that forcefully. Putting yourself on to another person is wrong that they lack the ability to. I think that's a bridge or winter. I think we all know this. This is something that we have to stand up for, for a little kids. And there are certain acts that everybody knows that we, we have a different Spectrum. That's materializing here. That says, well, maybe they, maybe they they. Maybe your brain is still developing. What I would submit to you, that there's a bridge too far, even on that category and that's where I'm trying to draw a line here with stand up for our kids and and write some of these crimes and get projects. There's an opportunity to go after them. I can't imagine being a parent finds out. His child is raped and seeks to try to try to get somebody to address for that crime. Only to find out that the the other birth rate my kid is never going to be held, responsible has no possibility of being held responsible and because they, they weren't quote, unquote, capable of knowing that what they were doing to my child wage. Please don't disturb me. Thank you, representing. The young. I I'm going to respectfully ask for for a no vote on this amendment and I do want to make it really clear to them that I believe that we are going to be holding these kids accountable, just not through the criminal justice system, which we know is not an evidence-based Rehabilitation system and see how is through Behavioral Health Services, like foot beds family initiated treatments wraparound wise Services family. We cancel a Reconciliation Services. Hope beds. If this is a homeless Youth and they're still civil court options, like dependency position, petitions at risk youth, child in need of synthesis petitions. So by no means always saying that these children just will go along that way, but like for instance, a family initiated treatment, which is something down in consideration with their birth. With their family, with their parents to take responsibility for their youth, that they can be involuntarily, i t a. Up until the age of Thirteen and that's already based in there is a given making sure that family does have a role in that and that is an important role for them to have. And so again urging a no vote again, not to say that these kids don't need help. I thought, that's exactly what we're saying is that these kids, these children need our help, not our punishment, but our Rehabilitation, our services are understanding of the trauma that they have been through this guidance. They've been through and making sure that they are, that they are raised, not in prison, but in a community that is wrapping around them and getting them, the help that they need, so they don't re-offend wage that they can rehabilitate. Additional remarks represent of debt. Thank you, madam chair. So that was involved in in kind of a, a workshop retreating twenty-five years ago, I guess. And we actually went to Florida and, you know, dealt with a lot of issues that would be different ones of us had in our lives. And I always, I really got an education things that I never thought about in my entire life. And, and it was around, it was around rape. And the Damage I saw to some of the young women found even the older women, who were part of our group, and I think it was about twenty-five or Thirty of us. Was it just tore my heart out. I had no idea. I'd never give it a thought and nobody ever taught me about this, but she had no idea to the pain, the emotional pain, the trauma, the lingering effects of something that happened. Ten fifteen twenty. Thirty years. Previous was just devastating. Intermediate. And I felt I felt some of empathy for, for seventies ladies that had been suffered through this and I think, okay. I just I can't imagine letting anybody escaped on something. That's a serious to cause as much damage to these people, you know, it was just one of the most eye-opening experiences I ever had. And I'm not sure who that was that. I was really supposed to be at that retreat, but I was and and I learned so much from it that, you know, one thing I've learned is that so few that I've always had a lot of respect for women. I knew of my mom educated me in that regard. And I've always had that but to see what what has happened is in different people and and even some of the young men, it would been raped his boys. And and I have a friend today. That was had some some challenges with being ranked as a child and he's he's seventy-five years old. The still suffers what happened to him when he was seven or eight years old and I just don't think I think rape is a serious serious offense? And I think that with that you need to be held accountable. You need to know that it's not right. It's not what Society views as acceptable behavior, you know, think a lot of what we're doing and we we can we can have side cords on our children. We can, we can give them Direction. And we can help them understand and we don't have to beat the tar out of them or any of those kind of things. We don't have to lock them up for a couple of years, but I think they need to know that there's there is a consequence and there is accountability and I would, I would ask her just body to vote. Yes. In this amendment. I think it's a great environment. Thank you. Maybe one of the vice chairs like to take over your business and seems to be frozen. I was wondering if it was just on my end. Thank you for noting that is Carolyn it, if you could go ahead and speak rep. Lex email again. This is I respectfully request, know, on Thursday. And then again, this is about the person and not the crime. You know, many young people are from these communities there. There's biding generational trauma, clinical poverty, over policing and I'm just fortunate in perspiration. And, you know, again there are many different or alternative responses that we can and are deploying. And we can do more to support these youth that are doing more support them and get them on the right path Alternatives, that don't involve incarceration or drive you deeper into the problematic behavior. That we might be seeing when we're talking about this and chairs, then that already listed off. A lot of those different things that we are doing to support our children, but you know, we can provide family reconciliation and services regionalized services like choose 180 who we heard from the other day. That was it organized. Really amazing results in their work with local Youth. And as adults, I believe that, you know, we have fully-formed brains. It's our responsibility to support our youth and find thoughtful and effective ways to help them recover. And not to just pretend that this Behavior goes away by, by calling them an adult, and throwing them behind bars and treating you in that way. We need to have more meaningful solutions to solve these problems and help them be successful. So again recommending no on this amendment think. Thank you, rep wax rap Eslick. Speak to a minute. Thank you. Rep. The Harris Kelly. They I think they were forgetting about the victims here. So to make sure that that these kids that are that performed the crime. It seems to me that we need to make sure that it in statute that they have mental health evaluation, and I don't see that in this bill. So four at first, I think that it's really important that we vote. Yes on this amendment, but I think that we're missing some pieces. Thank you. Thank you, brother. Eslick, young speaking to this amendment. Yeah, I think you've repairs telling I think we're missing something in the context of this. I understand that the the debate that we're having and following it closely. I understand the points are being made, but this amendment is is not saying and not arguing against the premise of the bill off. This is simply saying that we're going to allow prosecutors for children from the ages of eight through, twelve that if the prosecutor finds that the crime was so heinous that there's a possibility of at least pursuing something. The default mechanism of the underlying Bill, even with this amendment would still be in place with regard to the arguments that we've made or have been made against the amendment. All I'm asking, is that June? In addition to what we've said for first and second degree of murder. We're also adding a few other ones that are equally bad. It doesn't change the default standing of the bill. It simply says it gives a prosecutor's an opportunity to say that. Okay. Well, yeah, it come on. I you know what this is going to be with, with all due respect. We know what this is going to be. These are going to be the most heinous of crimes that these kids are committing. And if we want to offer them a full mature spectrum of offering, the give that option back to the prosecutors to go. Look at the say no, you know what? This one we're going to argue that the presumption needs to be removed away. Then yes, they knew what they were doing. And yes, we're going to go after this one. It's not going to be everyone, the default, assumption still stays in place and I just wanted to call out that clarification because I think it's I think it's so important here. I don't know. I have developed a reputation over the years of being a Firebrand on a number of things. I'm trying my best. To change that for the sake of assuming the good of all intent, that's going on here. But this one is really thrown me for a loop. I just bought this, this is an obvious one. I mean, we can think of some of the situations that occur on the streets, where the most heinous of Acts are committed on other people by Young by young people. And then in this case, look and I got to tell you the first thing I told my mom and I turned ten years old. You know, what I declared to her. I said Mom I'm now a decade years old a decade-old. I'm now ready to take on more of a manly leadership role in this house because we didn't have a damn. That's what I told my mom at 10. My brain, however, mature or immature or developed or undeveloped. It wasn't the time said that to my mom. At the age of seven years old. I was getting my younger brother up and walked in this elementary school cuz my mom was already working at a job. Kids can get these things and this isn't changing the underlying default, Assumption of the bill, which I, I still don't agree with. Obviously, I remember for that, but this is just giving a different option to say. It can be overcome. If a prosecutor wants to do it. That's the Nuance of this amendment. I really, please consider it again and I recommended thank you. Thank you, representative young. I see that chairperson has rejoined us. We just had final comment on this amendment shearson a.m., And we were going to suspend the vote on this to move to testimony. But I defer to you now that you were able to return. Thank you. Thank you very much Madam, Vice chair. Sorry about that long, lovely technical issues there on my end. Okay. So all those in favor of the young Amendment 508, please say your name. And I youngest Riverboat, I trip down sign and all those opposed. Say your name and Nae represents. May I have your vote Amendment. Boeing is not adopted. Representative Harris tally that. Thank you chairperson. I moved that the adopted amendments be corporated into striking amendment in in Gross. Substitute Senate Bill 5122 to re-record it out of committee with a do pass. As amended recommendation. Thank you and has been moved and seconded and engrossed. Substitute Senate. Bill 51-26 be moved out of committee as amended final remarks. I would just say that this is an important bill to provide understanding of brain development and to still provide services to Youth and make sure that they are being raised the services and the help that they need being held accountable versus culpable, which I think was a great line. A good gentleman representing good man, and I think that is its practical. So I'm going to urge your support additional remarks represent dad. Thank you, madam chair. So, as I said earlier, you know what, I can draw on in my life, my life experience. So, my dad's brother, he had, they had to agents and, and there's three of us in our family and we grew up somewhat together, you know, through our lives and my dad's brother. My uncle. They let those kids pretty much dead have the free rein. They weren't held accountable. They weren't any fences, any boundaries. So why they've had a very very difficult life. They've never been able to really Channel orange juice Channel, their disciplines. And stay focused on anything and it's sad. And and we've talked about, you know, I talked about it with my two cousins, one of which is no longer with us because of the lack of boundaries are lack of discipline online and she but they said, we used to talk about when we were younger and they said they, you know, they would get they would really just absolutely so big fists get some direction from their parents because they felt like they were loved because they could do whatever they wanted to do and what they look at, you know, myself and my two sisters and we seem to have some, some traction, and some goals and and channels and life. And they they resented that that they didn't have what we had and they I I can understand where they were coming from and that's my concern here is we're not trying to make hardened criminals out of anybody who are trying to get them some direction. And we're trying to return to Teach consequences and teach right from wrong. So, you know, we're our nickname here as lawmakers. And so, we make laws that we expect people to follow yet. Then we're going to home, send it out to where they don't have to follow, you know, and and brain developments an interesting. It's an interesting concept. But, you know, when we're, when we're eight years old, our entire bodies are completely wage jobs and they continue to develop as we age and but you know, I I didn't know that. I got a pretty good idea of right and wrong when I was six. And by the time I was ten, I had a solid idea of what things were right and wrong and and it wasn't but, you know, my page spent time with me and told me this stuff as well as other people, you know, wasn't just my parents and we learned these things and I but it's the one thing that really kept me from doing things because I mean all of us as young stated earlier, you know, we were eight ten years old. There was a lot of conversation about doing a lot of things that were inappropriate behavior, it's based. I don't know how, I don't know. What what girls do and boy, I thought about all the things that is inappropriate and when they're that age. And we talked about this stuff but we also knew that we didn't act on it because we knew there were consequences and and and I think that's important thing and I'll tell you what, I was, I thought the first time I ever went to a jail just a torrid it got my attention. I thought I don't ever want to go there. I don't want dead. And I'm going to tow the line here and deal with right in this society. And that was at a pretty young age. And, you know, I'm going to tell you what right now. I still don't want to go to be home because I don't think they're pretty nice place thousand. And so I do, I think about what's right and wrong and I and the catch myself. We all need that discipline in that direction and those those sideboards in our lives. And, and I'm afraid that we're going to check if if we let them off and they don't have any direction sideboards consequences, then they're not going to, they're going to lose that totally and and they're just not going to be there form of their lives. I think that, you know what I'm talking about here. We're just talking Direction, teaching the difference between right and wrong, but also knowing that there's consequences because in life consequences and is something that maybe we don't want to live with, but they they are. They're so anyway, I'm urging a no vote on this of this the bill and log. Be a know on on this side. So thank you manage opportunities. Do you represent that represent Harris tally. And then they do. Note for the committee that we do have a lot of people rushing to testify on the novel, for the public hearing represent of hairstyling. Thank you, cherson, and I will keep my comments short cuz I also want to hear from our neighbors very quickly. I just wanted to encourage a yes vote as well on this bill. I think the senator for opposing this bill for consideration of of something that we've known for a long time in Washington state. We need to consider, which is the evolution what we understand from scientists and best practice about what young people need. When they make mistakes nothing about this bill says that they will not be held responsible for consequences. But what it does say is that incarcerating them. We know it's not the solution that will actually put them on the right path to not be deeper in our incarceration, in jail systems. And for my district, I not, I know I'm not alone in this off. The youth that are so often in these Cycles have trauma, poverty and often a melanin level. That puts them In Harm's Way for black brown indigenous youth and poor youth club. Us being able to double down on our investment in the system that you keep them from. Even having these Choice points for making these mistakes. In the first place is a good investment in these young people in our communities. And that is the direction that this bill that's us. Ask our young people, all young people being treated with care and how can we address these issues in a way that make sure this doesn't happen to anyone else ever again. So, that seems very important to me in my neighbors, and I encourage you. Yes, thank you. Thank you. Represent the thing. I appreciate about being able to work with all of you. My fellow legislators is sometimes we get to agreed to disagree, a couple of comments made today. In gender debate. In me. One of the girls was going to juvenile detention rules their lives. And there's a gentleman young man who I had to arrest on felonious, charge went to fourteen months in a dog. Juvenile Detention Facility, operated by the state of Washington. And the first day that person came back to school. Came directly to me as school resource officers arresting officer and said I learned my life less and I want to change my life if well, you help me another example is that it doesn't ruin lives as I was on the floor of the House of Representatives and the camera Police Department called me on my cell phone and said represented Cooper. We have your adopted son in one of our cars. In your driveway is going about the community committing crimes and there's we contacted. Juvie. They said they're going to have a bed for him. So as in hang on a second, I called u v and I said, well you just hold him in a holding for four hours. I will generally do and then my wife come and pick him up and said we'll do that for you real. Pretty get represented. They did that and guess what? My son never committed one of those crimes. Again. He learned his lesson and then lastly off. Brain science. I got called to a house one time where a nine year old and a nine year old was running a home that had three adults in the home and a seven year old brother was very obedient off the parents told him to do but the nine year old was running the household. So I made a game plan with that family using the tools available to me as a law enforcement officer. And before I left that house without having to make an arrest off, but using the tools of leadership that young man took down the barricades to his bedroom, cleaned up his bedroom and all of us. Well, I never had to go back to that house again. So, you know, I don't think it's just a brain, same thing. I think it's a character issue, and taking kids. Did you travel attention often times? It does not ruin their lives. They learned their lessons, so, I'll be voting. No today. A mentor, the only other point I'm not going to belabor for the sake of gravity and not to belabor the points. I've made on amendments. I think they stand on their own Merit, but I will note home, you know, representing Goodman, brought up the hardening and represent slippery brought up the science. And I just want to make a note about the science whether I disagree with it or, or not. The entire argument about the science is only being discussed from the pro side of the argument is being made. That what we want to leverage, whatever scientific data that we're looking at here that we believe is conclusive because we want to use it to the benefit, the kids and I would submit to you that it's not just quote unquote, the good jobs that are going to use. This science is the people on the street. We are with this type of legislation where we are saying, is impossible for a child under the age of Thirteen to commit a crime. And by the way, if you can't commit a crime and you're not committing there for a climb, what are the consequences for not committing a crime? There aren't and that's my point. Is that the illicit side of our society will use this as justification with the same scientific studies at their hand, with the same type of reasoning? That the good guys would want to use the science to say. Well, we don't wash issue. We want to, you know, help you mature your brain. The bad side is going to use this as a grooming technique. Hey, hey. Hey young man. You know, I know this your little nervous about doing this. I want you to go snaps that purse. I want you to go do this, but don't worry about it because it's not wrong. They, you know, that it's not even illegal for you to do this. As a matter of fact, that's just one example of a myriad of psychological ways that the illicit part of society is going to crawl upon our kids. If we don't, at least instantiate the line between good and bad and right and wrong and at least instantiated in law. So that even if we come back and we make some tweaks to how we address it. Don't forget that the bad side of society is going to use us and they will harden these kids into a different pair off and they will do it without request. They will do it without permission. They will prowl upon these kids. They will use the laws of we are passing now as justification to groom these kids. In fact, she says this while it might seem like it's wrong. It's not really. Because it was more than the lawmakers would say, it's wrong, wouldn't they? Mostly they don't say it's wrong. See it's okay to do. And all of a sudden, you get these kids groomed in their teens Thinking Up Up and Down and Down is up. And I've seen it over and over and over even with the laws that we've had in place for laws that were in place when I was growing up, these types of arguments being made upon kids to try to get them to pursue a list of activity, from Bank of another real, big concerns about that. And I think that we should take the bill down and and rework some of these things. And I think there's some common-sense things we can do to try to get it right. But not in power, the bad part of society that the kids. Thank you, appreciate that. I would love to continue debate in another time. If we can. Thank you very much. Want to make sure we have that here from our public meetings tested by Luke. Can you please call the roll? Representative, send representatives and vote High representative Harris. Tally representative, Harris, Kelly bowtie representative Herron reboots. I representative rule, representative will vote. I represented rule vote. I representative dent and votes. Naidu, not pass representative Dent volt. Do not pass representative. Chase grabs it in. Facebook's may do not pass representative. Chase votes, may do not pass representative McCaslin. Representing the Catholic votes name, do not pass representative. McCaslin. Votes may do not pass representative Kalin. Groups in college with my representative calendar notes, I representative Eslick, representative s, like it's bolts. May do not pass representative s like boats and they do not pass representative Goodman. Given what I representative Goodman bowtie representative, Clifford. They're both named do not pass representative Clifford books, and I do not pass representative or to yourself representative or two cellphones. I representative or two cell phones. I bought a representative, Wicks representative wigs, bowtie representative Wicks, folks. I represent and of young representative young. Do not pass what anybody like to change their vote? In non-liquid, please record. The tally. Yes, ma'am chair. There are seven. I 6 Nae zero. Excused Robson. Thank you by your vote on Senate Bill 5122 passes out of committee with a do pass has the committee. I do just want to say quick heart-felt. Thank you for this discussion. Obviously, everybody had very much the, the best for our youth in mind and just I think with different approaches. So I just wanted to really thank God committee for the for the respectful and since your conversation today. With that, we will be moving on to our public hearing and apologize to everybody, especially to Senator Wilson who I believe has been waiting. We will now move for a awfully quick briefing from Lina on Sanibel to 327-5237. Thank you. The record Lena Brodsky counsel to the committee and grow. Second substitute Senate, Bill 5237 expands. It's accessible affordable, child care, and early childhood development programs. A partial fiscal note is available. This is the Senate companion to the fair start for kids act House Bill, twelve, thirteen, which was previously heard by this committee. And for that reason, and in the interest of brief briefing, I'm going to provide an overview of how the current Senate Bill differs from the current house version dead. And there's also been a table that's been added comparing the two bills in their current form and that's currently available in the electronic Bill book. So the current Senate Bill 5237 moves, the non-exhaustive list of allowable uses. Of the Fair start for kids account, out of the section, creating the account and a separate Section 102, which sorry, what's a non-exhaustive list of spending goals and strategies. The bill adds, the Fair start for kids account to the definition of related funds which is in the legislative balanced budget requirement in the section, concerning the Early Learning advisory Council or alack a new position. Oh, sorry. New provision is added direct elac to convene, a temporary licensing, sub-committee to provide feedback and recommendations by December 1st 2022 on Improvement to the Statewide licensing. Process strategies to increase the number of licensed, childcare providers model policies for licensed. Childcare providers incentives and financial support to help prospective providers, navigate, the licensing process birth. Hopefully, Working Connections the federal, the federal and state funded program, that provides subsidies for child care to families at or below 200% of the federal poverty level in the current 5257 Bill beginning, July 1st, 2021. A family is eligible for Working Connections, when the households annual income is at or below 60% State median income adjusted for family office and the child, receiving terrorist less than 13 years old or nineteen years old, and has a verified special need beginning, July 1st, 2027 and subject. To Appropriations. A family is eligible when the households annual income is at or below 60% State median income and is sorry. It's it's above 60% State median income and adorable, 75%, State, median income, the Working Connections, co-payment model, differs from the house version and a side-by-side comparison can be seen in the table. That's been added to the EB be dead. Beginning July 1st, 2021 and subject to Appropriations. The department. May not require work, requirements to receive Working Connections benefits for any parent who's a full-time student of a community Town, local college or tribal College in good standing and enrolled in certain programs. This difference from the house version which provides that the same provision, but beginning July 1st, 2023 and does not include subject to Appropriations and removes the requirement. The student that the student be in good standing for the early childhood education, assistance program or recap the states. That's the state's voluntary preschool program in 5237 subject to Appropriations, early entry cap is expanded to allow for children who have a family income at or below 100% State, median income. The house version is not subject to Appropriations and expands early entry cap to 50% State, median income. For the 20 21, 22 school years. He can't rates must be set at a level at least 10% higher than the rates established in the 2019. Twenty One operating budget. This is higher than the 7% Mandate of the house version. There are differences in the Child Care. Subsidy rates in Senate, Bill 4237, beginning July, 1st. 2021, Child Care. Subsidy rates must achieve the 85th percentile of market for licensed or certified childcare providers. And the house version moves to the 85th percentile by July 1st 2023. With a number of supports in the bill are subject to Appropriations in the Senate version, but not the house version including the complex needs funds, non-standard hours rate model and infant in early childhood mental health consultation. I'm happy to answer any questions the committee may have Thank you, and welcome, Senator Wilson. Thank you for your patience and for bringing this bill forward and we have lots of people testifying, so hopefully we can hear from them as much as possible. Well, I will thank you so much Madam chair and members of the committee. I am absolutely happy to be here today and to bring this bill forward to you. I know it is familiar and Lena. Thank you. So much. You did on really covering the differences and I understand there's a chart so I will leave it to your own eyes to kind of see what the differences are. But I do want to really just High Life Again, the four areas that this bill addresses that represent and I have been working on that just this session, but throughout my three sessions in the Senate and House around the stabilization and expansion of the industry of childcare, making childcare more affordable, making childcare and early learning more accessible and strengthening prevention and intervention. Services, and I really do want to call out really two differences in the bill. And one of those things is really a related to the licensing systems that we've heard about providers all across the state and I will say the early start act which you probably are very familiar with that was a precursor to this Fair start for kids act, really focused on quality and what the Fair start for kids act does is really turn, its attention, not only on quality, but really on access as well. And we know we had issues prior to the Panthers making. Now we have them even more. So, so the systems work and the system alignment is really important. And so that is why the licensing sub-committee piece was added. And I was very happy to include that as an amendment that came from the floor of the other piece of this is because of the pandemic, many individuals have realized that school was the care setting for many years. And that since we've had the pandemic in online distance learning and hybrid learning. What we realized is that we have to understand where children are when they're not in a classroom, not in school. So we also called up and called out and really lifted the supports for Youth Development in programs, serving birth through twelve. And those kinds of things would be expanded Learning mentorship, school-age, child care, wraparound, services, and supports. And all those things. I'll say, for forty years. This has been my career working in early care, and education, and trying to create a quality and accessible system of care for All Families, regardless of where they are across the state and it has been the work I've done. As I continued to be in the Senate. This bill is a culmination of hundreds of hours of work that represent and I have done together with stakeholders that represent, many, who you'll hear from them. This is a game changer for kids and families across our state and it reflects the work of so. So, so many people. I'm very proud today to present the Senate version of The Fair, start for kids accent. Bill 5237. Thank you madam chair and I will answer any questions that members might have. But I would rather give my time to the many folks who signed up to speak about how important this bill is to them as well. Thank you so much. Thank you very much. And when you're going to go ahead and start with testimony and have a minute-and-a-half IP address, but I want to hear from, as many people as possible. Mental vice-chair will thank you, madam chair. Yes, we're going to move through this fairly quickly. Starting with Pamela Williams. And after that, we'll hear from Sharon hanok followed. I'm sorry, I think starting at the top heavy Lou. I know Rodriguez. Okay. Okay, starting at the top patylu, please. Good afternoon. Chairperson. Vice-chairs Harry's, Italian Rule and members of the committee that my name is Patty Lou. I live in South Seattle, and I'm a mother of two. Wonderful. Little boy is nearing five and two. It's an Open Secret of my mom's a, telling anyone else for your pregnant. Your first calls you to be getting on life years. Long wait list of childcare a few engine spaces in our area and it's even more challenging for those who didn't know and can't find a spot at all. Reading also have to be able to afford it for years, wherever you turned people were talking about the cost of higher education, but absolutely no one told you before you had kids, that child care actually costs, more than College founded, 30% of in-state tuition for terrorist groups life. And you have to be precise to impending. Because, for example, budget spent on it for us, those pennies added up to $2,525 for young kids and full-time care, which is more than our mortgage in 2020. I have the opportunity to make a big career and it was my dream job, but still was only barely enough money for child care. And unfortunately, when the pandemic hit and our child care provider closed, I was laid off because I could no longer put it by full hours due to my increased caregiving responsibilities at home. I like many other women have been left wondering, whether I should go up on the computer. I worked so hard for and just stay home with my kids because the math doesn't add up. This pandemic didn't cause these problems. It is only laid bare m, And I was to see, but parents, those moms have long known, the difficulty, finding at a recording quality. Childcare. Take a huge toll on women. This is we have now isn't working child doesn't work. Either way. You need a first serve for kids. In a fair, start for working moms, and I urge you to pass in a bill due to 37. Thank you. Thank you so much. And I will move to either Rodriguez, please. Good morning, chairperson and members of the committee. My name is Ida Rodriguez and I own Busy Bee's childcare in Blaine. Welcome County to specific. I'm a member of the SEIU nine-to-five and here's support of SB. 5237 Covent made it. Clear how critical and affordable how critical affordable accessible Child Care is in our community and our economy before they can get. Like, we already had a broken system. I live in, welcome County in the majority of the county is considered a childcare desert. In fact, over the last decade over half and over half across the state. Nearly half of a licensed, childcare providers, like myself have left the industry now after covid-19 been fewer Child Care Professionals when we need more to allow parents to go back to work. Our biggest reason for providers that have left industries that the state has never paid us for the true cost to provide high-quality care for. For example, I provide care for both subsidized and private private private paid off. Kids and I average a discrepancy between private paying somebody about $7.25 per day. That works off works out to an average yearly loss of $1,885 per sub child enrolled, right? Which works out to an average of $11,300 per year as I provide more than 50% of subsidized care within my program. This is just simply not sustainable. I cannot continue except so that is family. Can you buy program at this rate? Childcare providers are largely women and women of color. And we've been declared essential workers with the state has never paid us. Fairly for our work. I've even considered changing in my business, plan to Private Preschool and that would result in the termination of care of more than 50% of my child care of subsidized, family and require them to have to find Alternative Care in a child could hurt, right. They they'd be displaced. Basically is what that means. We can't go back to the way things were and childcare because the system didn't work to begin with my union supports is Bill because it will support provider's. Yep. Like Me by increasing subsidy rates and enhancements for additional skills, like trauma-informed, care and dual-language options and capital Investments to upgrade facilities. It also makes care more affordable for families by expanding eligibility and reducing co-pays accessible affordable. Childcare is a basic infrastructure of our state and economy. In fact, the Department of Commerce says Washington loses two billion a year because of the Chernobyl and lost work due to child care issues. And that was before covid-19, started Child Care is critical in our city. I'm going to have to ask you to sorry. That was great. I try the Puerto Rican and me, try to go quick and I couldn't was awesome. Thank you so much. We'll move to Shell Freiburg. Please followed by Jessica Heffner morning, house, children youth and families committee. My name is Cheryl Freiburg. And we are in support of the fair wage act. I'm the director of the Tulalip Betty J Taylor. Early Learning Academy serving kneecap Early Head, Start child care and Montessori out of 265. Slots. We have 72 month. Safari Camp every day, we get to watch the positive effects that early learning has on our children and families. We serve families that have needs that would go unmet, without our services, one of our families had a child that developed social anxiety due to the school closures that have happened. She displayed anxiety at home. Even when her mother would go to the restroom. Fortunately, our family Advocate was able to work with the family to find mental health, support to help the family address, the issues that were happening at home. During non covert times. We had families that would tell us that they were afraid to leave the academy because they knew that they would not get the support for the family that they had received here. The relationships with staff and support services that are provided are key to helping families that struggle through life. Through Early Learning children, are able to get the Educational Foundation that is needed for a positive outcome in their lives, through K, twelve college, career and life. The fifth year, Head Start report showed the positive benefits of early learning off. A children's lives. This is especially crucial for a Native American children that have been disenfranchised from educational institutions since boarding school times. We need all children to be able to attend em. Learning programs for educational purposes, safety nutrition health, and mental. Health services are family advocates. Work to improve the family. Out comes for employment housing, health, and safety nutrition education. This is why thank you so much for your testimony. We really appreciate you being here. Okay? Now we're going to move on to Pamela Williams, please. Hello, thank you. Madam, chair, and members of the committee for the record. My name is Pamela Williams and I am as the state director of parent-child plus here today. In support of engrossed, second substitute Senate, Bill 5237. I'm also resident of the 23rd. Legislative district parent-child plus is one of the voluntary home visiting models available in Washington state. We currently serve 13th of families and our core home visiting services in King Pierce and Yakima, County. Shop plus supports early, literacy and parent engagement majority of our families and parents dropped us off immigrants and Approximately. 80% of them. Their home language is not English. We were to hire staff that speak the languages and share the cultures of the families that we serve and approximately 25% off sale. Our former program. Participants another branch of our work service family, child care providers. Currently. We are working with bipod, family, child care, providers to strengthen their early, literacy and family dog. Agent skills. Additionally. We recently received a grant from the Department of Commerce where we are identifying current and former parent-child plus parents, who might be interested in using the skills that they learned while working with your own child, during their tenure, with parent-child bus to become family, child care providers, to help reduce some of the childcare deserts in our state. We appreciative of the public and private funding from home or you're thank you. Thank you. Thank you, and then we're going to have Jessica Heavener next, please. Am okay, girls real boy. Almost two year old girls. I'm here today to thank you for the Fair, start for Iraq kids, for the last seven years. I would let you know. Look at home, working minimum hours, to self employment, to keep my kids home with me a little over a year ago. I was able to get a protection order against the father, his children. It was amazing to me that my children night out of that domestic violence situation, but that meant Adam long time I tried to find child, can was put on a three-month waiting list at multiple locations. So I continued working self, unemployment self-employment. Once I finally found childcare through the pandemic. I was lucky in the competition for Federal Way. School District, even accounts an amazing way to get them is $3,000 a month. Which is more than I used to make the weight. I lost. Jessica, another $600. I did my review for childcare in January and because of what I make now in the current pay structure month and we will try and get written remarks from Jessica and send them around to the committee. Apologize, for that technical issues. Thank you so much, and we've Justin is up next. All right, I can you see me? And hear me. All right, cool. Thank you. Madam, chair and members of the committee and my name is Luke Jasmine. And I'm the owner, and director of several design programs at Spokane. I also serve as a president of wcca. I am here today to avoid strong support for Senate Bill. 5237. The impact. Covid-19 has had on Child Care programs Families. Our Workforce is immense. However, Child Care programs across the state have risen to. The challenge has created by this pandemic. We have continually shown every day. Just how safe, loving nurturing and essential Child Care, programs are to the communities and Families. As you all know, childcare was already in crisis. Before covid-19. If it were not for emergency, grants for providers in childcare vouchers for families. During the pandemic. The childcare industry would have completely down, send a bill. 5237 close to stabilize this field. We support all the stabilization efforts creative at Asheville as Center owners and directors. We care for the majority of children. Who attend a license care and employ the most child care, Educators in Washington state, to ensure the perspective of child care, programs, including the families and teachers. We support in employed is heard we would respectfully offer for another see on the Fair start investment, accountability, and oversight board. When we heard testimony. It's time to transition urge you to pass this bill. It is vital to a long-term stabilization of our field. Thank you. Thank you so much. Okay, now we'll hear from Sharon. Haddock, please. My name is Sharon. Hi. I'm from Bonney Lake. Thank you for this opportunity to testify dead. Urging a no vote on Senate bill collector 37, although I appreciate the funding elements of it. And I know daycares need this kind of funding, there are strings attached. When it comes to funding section. 104 about accountability and oversight is overseeing the privately owned businesses, privately owned churches and non-profits in that section. It also includes a mandate possibly on policies of dismantling racial systemic racial problems. And that is what I'm concerned about. How long are you going to be implementing a plan to just manage systemic racialism in and toddlers? And will you be forcing a Somalian daycare? A Korean nuclear Catholic provider to integrate children, just because it is within the dcyf guidelines. I feel it's my day cares for my children because of the cultures. Connections. I wanted to have someone that would nurture and Shake on my Japanese Heritage as as I raised my children, but now I have to explain to my children that wage. They are not considered a person of color that they are considered a new white because under certain descriptions dcyf and Thurston County being filmed. The Asian Community is now being reclassified as you watch here and headaches so much for your testimony. We know ready to hear from any Anderson. Great, good morning, chair and committee members. Amy Anderson representing the association of Washington business. I'm also one of three tricare's along with, with Jasmine of the Washington State Department of Commerce Child Care collaborative task force and wage, according 5237. I want to start by saying Washington state. Does not have a successful economic recovery from the current Global pandemic without affordable quality child care that our Workforce can access to begin to return to the work. Workplace, AWB believes that the policies in 5287, including increasing the subsidy rate that can the cliff expanding before and after school, school, school school here, and support for the childcare Workforce, will go a long way to increase inaccessible to Affordable, childcare Washington State. There must be a strategic and long-term solution to Preparing our state's, youngest Learners to be successful, member states, Workforce that recognizes savings and other aspects of our state budget. We encourage legislators to continue looking for those opportunities for regulatory reforms, that can provide savings for the provider without compromising wage. I want to take all of our legislators specifically represents them as Senator Wilson for all their hard work and thoughtful nature of this legislation, Washington State businesses, support their work life and want to make sure their employees have accessible affordable, quality child, care options that will allow them to participate in the workforce. In our state's economy. We encourage or support to 5237. Thank you. Now, we'll be moving on to Margaret Lee. And then Saint. Hello. I'm Margaret Lee from Skagit, County. And for the record. I'm opposed to 5237. I can also appreciate the intent of this bill, and I respectfully ask you to remove section 104. That's the concerning, part is the equity lens that they are trying to within this bill. May be unintentionally or intentionally many of our day. Cares are in churches and are privately owned section 104 of the bill assumes, these facilities have institutionalized or systemic racism, but I wanted to direct the committee's attention to the brand new brochure that dcyf dated 222 2021. So it's less than a month old. It is the department of children, youth and families, strategic priorities 20-21 Through The Years. Twenty twenty-six on page 3, title groups of racial disparities and very birth. Slime there says race has no genetic or biological bases. Again that says race has no genetic or biological rate basis. I believe that God determined our birth and soda science of getting to our race. So the question for the committee, will you be denying licenses to hear testimony and we'll move on to John Welch, please. Thank you chairperson members of the wage. I am John Welch and I serve as superintendent of the Puget. Sound Educational Service District and on behalf of the association of the sdsr 90s D's across the state, stand in strong support of Seminole. 5237. EST is survey unique role in the prenatal, through third grade, as partners, connectors and supporters of system efforts. This bill addresses. For example, he has bought a host over 5,000 or so approximately one-third of the children in ecap program. Statewide the bill addresses, a number of our priorities for a strong and high-quality Early Learning. Support system including system supports, Child Care, Subsidy and Co pay support to ensure infrastructure of childcare strong for our lowest paid families families, who took of work to lift up our society access to learning continued. Sustained funding for ecap racially, and culturally specific comprehensive programs, that change lives and trajectories, and create more Equitable we much for your testimony. Diana Staten, please, good morning, chair, Stan ranking, member, dance, and members of the committee. My name is Diana Staten. Gave me an extension policy specialist for the Arc of Washington state advocating for children. And adults with developmental disabilities sent a meal, 5237 addresses, the critical needs of child care and early learning. And when we have children with developmental disabilities, who utilize the birth of three programs, they benefit as well as the state because about a call log. Of those children who get birth to three do not require any special education services when they get into K-12, but children with DDR are already strong biased and segregated from the beginning of their life. And when you add in racial cultural issues, that exclusion becomes even greater. We really appreciate that. Early learning advisory Council will need to maintain a focus on inclusionary practices for children with disabilities and the rate racial Equity as many of them to struggle next, please. Thank you. Thank you. Madam, chair. And members of the committee. My name is pajar fireman. I'm an infant. An only child mental health consultant. Working with providers and Children and Families, thoughts and prayers. Tony. There are nearly 3300, Early Learning providers, who care for around a hundred and eight thousand children who have access to Mental, Health, Association Statewide office. I'm just one of the six Consultants that serving all of this providers specifically for King and Pierce County who has half of those 3300 provider's meeting. I'm serving one hundred and sixteen hundred eligible providers by myself. The German is immense and I urge you, to increase access to mental, health consultations right away and to support bill, fifty-three thirty-seven. I want to share with a little bit story about the power of consultation recently. It was able to support a provider who was struggling and frustrated dealing with a four year old, who was dead. Hard time, focusing paying attention following directions along with aggressive behaviors and temper tantrums. After some consultations. We figure out that the shelves actually has a real Sports living habits, and we were able to work together with the providers and a parent's to