Financial services and trade committee. And so members of the committee know, there was a bill out there around business reopening that we thought might have referred to this committee because it is this committee does the business and economic development is actually having a public hearing tomorrow, but you know, that that bill has, I don't know. I think there are six hundred people already signed up for it. So I think one of the goals of today's session is to give business owners who this is all focused on the most recent closures, and give them a, a little bit more time than just the third year, 60 seconds. They'll get on a hearing where you have one or two people find out. And before we go to those small business owners. We're going to have Lacey. Fehrenbach, the deputy secretary of the Department of Health, kind of run the committee through, you know, that's kind of a Governor's plan. And in terms of reopening and, and then, I encourage everyone of the committee asked questions as we go, do not wait till the end and with that, deputy secretary, Fair wage,Through them, we can hide the you can get rid of it. Yeah. Good morning. Thank you for having me. I'm Lacey. Fehrenbach, deputy secretary for covered response. I do have slides and that I believe are going to be old up. So I'm not a perfect and you can move to the next one. So I'm here today to talk about the healthy Washington Road map to recovery and at the highest level, the roadmap includes, you know, a few over-arching principles one. It is a regional approach, not recognizing our interdependence e and Reliance on each other and the same resources within our state. There are only two phases at this point. And that's really just a recognition of where we are in the pandemic and I'll say a little bit more about that the phase one or what shows, up as orange on these slides is what a lot of national groups and public health call, the Circuit Breaker phase, and it's really about preserving capacity within the healthcare system. When when that capacity is is severely infected. And that's to ensure that both people with covid-19 people who have other emergent Health needs can get access to the care that they need. And then phase two is a bit more open and you know, really The progress towards a gradual return to what we all hope is a more normal life. The, how did they decide on the off, the 10% reduction as opposed to just a more General? Like we want to see cases, decreasing and hospitalizations decreasing. What was the rationale, the same? Like, on the chart that you have laid off. There's a few spots that have decreasing cases of hospitalization. Just not quite the 10% number that was created here. Yes. Thank you. So, the The measures will go to the measures a little bit. We did look at measures that other states use National Frameworks at cetera on specific increases. We want to see a meaningful decrease and we adapted a methodology that's used by the World, Health Organization and CDC to assess. Lung disease is increasing flat or decreasing in countries or States depending on the organization. And so the the 10%, you know, when, when you think about the levels of disease that we have, we're having in most parts of the state over a 14-day. Several hundred cases. A 10% decline is, you know, not not a huge one. We wanted to see a meaningful decline to show that disease. Really is receding. And we had to do with it and we have to have some threshold in order to make a determination from a public health perspective. So on on the metrics, specifically the You can, you could actually go to the next slide, please. The as I said, the decline in cases for moving to phase two, it has to be a decline and then if you're in phase of life, you can remain there if you are flat or you have a declined. So if you're in that 0 to 10% change or you have to continue to have a decrease, you can remain in phase two and I see Senator Wilson has a question. You're welcome. Thank you. This speaks to the four metrics that we have to reach in order to get get will be able to move to the next phase. One of them is the positivity test how with the Department of Health and their own admission that they're positivity. Test is not accurate or can't be for a while. Then how do we get to that point in that particular metric for this metric? We are using positivity of electronically submitted lab results and that way we can't we do have both positive and negative thoughts and we we are using the period of most recent complete data seven days. So, you know positivity is a, a metric that we saw across many states. The threshold, we chose here lines up with the highest risk category for CDC as well as a few other states. And we looked down. Number of states metrics, the ICU occupancy metric came from a couple of national Frameworks and one of them resolved to save lives. Actually recommended 85% for the circuit breaker face, but in Consulting, with our Healthcare leaders and knowing what we know about the number of beds per capita in Washington state, we felt like ninety percent was a reasonable wage fresh. Hold Senator. Does your thank you. My question on the ICU bed occupancy. What was it? Prior to covet? I've talked to a m i c u nurses that have said basically hospitals, try to keep or not try to keep but 90% is basically where they're going to be out. Anyway, there any ways where is where was it prior to covet? And why are we using that? If there's no code in patients, in ICU beds? They're so it is true that our hospitals generally do run fairly full especially during the winter respiratory virus season. Something that is interesting this year. In fact that we're having very little flu influenza likely because of lots of the many of the mitigation measures we take for covid-19 protect against flu things, like wearing masks and and physically distancing. The the threshold really is to ensure that if we are in a surge and suddenly Well, and I also want to say there are people with covid-19. Obviously hospitals are going to try to operate. It's you know, they take care of the sick but it's also a business. They don't want there to be you beds at 50% if they've got it fully staffed,. So I think that number. We also need to look at the the codes that are in there. All right. So again, Trends the the two Trend measures you have to decrease to move to phase two and then you can remain in phase two flat or decreasing ICU occupancy, and test positivity, our threshold measures. You either meet them, or you don't to move to phase two. You have to meet all four or five digit is two. Once you're in, we give you the flexibility that you can. You can miss one and stay in phase two. So we do recognize that as businesses are more open than likely will be a little bit of an uptick in cases. Potentially. So as long as the community is ready to respond and the business community and the public are good at following, the mitigation guidance, you know, counties and regions have a reasonable chance of staying in phase two and some flexibility, both by allowing. Or decreasing Trends and that you only have to meet three of four metrics next slide. So these are and and, you know, to go back to the occupant ICU occupancy. We're not, we do have the data by hospital, but it is the occupancy across the whole region. So long, if a an individual hospital is quite full, you know, that will average out over the whole region. And you can see here. These are, this is the report that we ran last Friday off this week status. There are a couple of regions that are fairly close. We will have to look, you know, it'll be interesting to look at this week's data because Statewide we did see a pretty strong increase in cases in at the end of December and early January following the holidays, but but there are a couple of regions that are, you know, have three month and a couple of others that have to and are pretty close at this point. Next slide. Regarding what is allowed we tried to bring more consistency across activities in a given phase and we took into account. Should I stop for a question? There's a hand up. I am not seeing the hands. You're doing a better job of seeing the hands than I am mind. Probably Senator Sherrod. Brown sent home. My question is, I understand that you guys have grouped these into regions, but we understand that the basic business philosophy is for hospitals, not to have empty beds and then hospitals in an ancova g. R are going to have a certain percentage of empty Beds, which is going to be pretty much what we're establishing the same percentage as in a covid-19. Or why are we still basing this on the percentage of empty beds? I'm struggling with. How to accept that. Yep. We do it by region or we do it, you know, by by County, it's still the basic underlying business principle is the same. So the region the by region was approached is because when when hospitals start getting Fuller may need to transfer patients, they transfer within those EMS regions first or across their system. So that was that piece on on the on the occupancy wage, you know, we sort of walked through our rationale. We did consult with the Washington State Hospital Association and the Washington Medical coordination Center. On setting the threshold. And we did choose a higher threshold than than what is recommended nationally. What I guess the committee received like it was like a letter from. I think it's from the counties and some of the local Department of Health kind of as a saying they didn't, they feel they didn't have buying a guess on the way, the regional thing versus the county approach, I guess from before was there. I never heard was her response to that letter from last week or what was the you know the letter? Yes, we did receive a letter and we are writing a response to that letter. Yes it is. It has not gone out yet. Or product, or people just physically raising their hands cuz I only have like three or four of the committee members on the little right hand side of the power point. When we don't home screen share, I can see everybody to share and I actually did both, but you clearly were not paying attention. So I was too focused on your hair. Yeah, and can I ask you to just sort of took it and questions so Lacey. So my my understanding from talking to the hospitals, you know, this this whole thing is very difficult to gauge. You know, none of this has really happened before. But my, my general sense is that the overall goal of of what, the state has tried to do since Last March and April was to ensure that our hospitals were not overrun. Like, we've seen in New York, in at times, in Texas earlier this year. What's going on in Iraq right now? And, and so, is that really? Is that the reason that you've got these metrics on what capacity has to be? I mean that that seems logical to me. So we don't have a situation like, that outbreaks, but I understand the concern because it does seem a little bit arbitrary, but maybe you could comment on that because I do think that's a really a really important factor that we have to consider. We haven't seen a, what could happen if we don't get this, right? Yes, that is the goal in phase. One is to ensure that we are not overwhelming. Our Healthcare System. We are fortunate in Washington state that are hospitals. Have an agreement, that not one of them, or a region of them would not go into crisis, standards of care alone. They work fabulously together to ensure capacity, just the state and move patients as needed. So what is price of standards of care? That's important contacts. And, you know, I think if you want a session on that wage can certainly arrange that. But that's quite as when that is, when there are not enough beds or ventilators or icy use or staff to care for everyone who needs care. And so long, that is when you start choosing who you treat instead of treating, everyone that comes into the system, has to decide who's going to live and who's going to maybe not, that's the word we are trying to log. Avoid not you know that level of overwhelm and to the point of the measures. Yes, like we we haven't done this in our country in more than a hundred years. From many things have changed since that time. It is hard. It's very difficult to identify the right set of measures. We tried really hard to get a mix of measures that give us confidence that we're turning the corner on the level of disease and the burden on our Healthcare System and Thursday. We when we put this out we also said this is what we're going to try for now and if we learn that we need to adjust it, we will. And we've we've done that many times already in the pandemic off. Yes to send your Dozier as question. Was there ever any discussion? I guess Department of Health. If somebody's running, let's say at 91% ICU capacity, but the actual covet patience as a call back within that 91% are extremely small, would that ever factor into your decision? Or is that not something that I guess was like, would you view 91%? I said the paucity is okay, if if less than 5% of that was covid-19. Zor would that influence your guys thinking at all? Or is it just the straight? 90% regardless of whether there's a high number of patients are not. It is right. Now, the straight. 90% we did talk about covid-19 Cove it and agreed. It was both. I mean, the reality is we all rely on the same page or beds, whether we have covid-19. Sure, and, you know this the other thing I want to say is there there aren't additional phases on and we haven't discussed what the or decided what the metrics would be for additional Faith. They may not be those Healthcare capacity metrics in the more open phases later on that you don't see on this chart because at that point, we're really talking about containing the disease. Okay. The next line. Is there any other questions I do? Mister chair one quick comment on this. So if we are meeting track of the metrics and because of a business model of the hospital keeps their capacity at 90% even if you meet the other three and you've got declining numbers, we still can't move in that region in the face too. So I think that number should not be. I think occupancy should not be used. I mean when you look at declining rates, we have vaccinations found out, we have declining rates and because of a business model of the hospital, we will not get there. So you will still penalize us to move into stage two. I think that that needs to be looked at Will we will look at it? Thank you for the feedback there. I do want to point out. There are several regions below the 90% threshold. So I appreciate that our hospitals run for if you go back, one song. so, the Hospital. The ICU occupancy, it's only two regions that are above that threshold right now. And we're not, you know, there may be multiple hospitals above that region. Am looking at the, the metric for the overall region and the total number of beds in the region. Okay? Going forward. So regarding what is allowed in each of the phases wage, you know, this is really we tried to bring consistency looking at things of is an activity indoors versus Outdoors indoors is more risky. And you maintain reliably six feet of physical distancing wear a mask. What is the number of people is, you know, if it's indoors is they're reasonable ventilation Etc. And to try to bring as much consistency between the two or between sectors within each phase as possible next slide. I think there were was interest in some specific sectors and you know, just a reminder that activities are safer when you can wear a mask and maintain distance and be outdoors or have really good ventilation. And with smaller numbers of people. I did put up here, a quick comparison of what safe safe. Start phase two looks like before the restrictions that were put in place in November and December and early January and then compared that to phase one phase two in the roadmap. You know, these these are some examples of activities that are, you know, the the most restricted. And the reason for that is that they are among the most risky activities or items from a disease risk perspective and the Infectious Disease. Society of America, has an index wage. And at the top of that index are things like going to the gym, eating out and out. Inside at a restaurant, playing full-contact, sports large, concerts eating at a buffet going to bars at 5. We did try, we recognize that this is really hard for our communities and businesses and we tried to create ways for them to be open so that people can. I get a physical activity? We put in a square foot requirement that goes well beyond the six feet of physical distancing based on National data and information that we had and recommended training and small groups were also allowing some that use Sports including even indoors to do training inside with some limitations. And then for restaurants, you know, we we have not opened indoor dining but we did put out guidance that allows in addition to outdoor dining or dining to home. Way to allow some level of business activity. Even in this most restrictive, circuit breaker face. So, I guess they're very for obviously. There's a lot of other, I mean, Democratic democratically-controlled states. I mean, we're one of three without off dining, one of three, the restrictions where we're at for indoor Fitness. I mean, what was, I guess? The thought process of cuz it seems like there has been some other states who are sick too often terms of successfully fighting. When you exercise, you are breathing heavily, usually. And we know that aerosols accumulate in an indoor space. And so we have you know, we have provided a way for Jim's to reopen here and for indoor Fitness to happen. I recognize it is very restrictive. It is very cautious. I think the bottom line, if we want to reopen our economy is that we have to get our disease rates down and that is going to require all of us working together to slow. The spread of covid-19. We have a tool in our tool box that we didn't have a couple of months ago vaccines. So getting more and more people vaccinated we put out information about that yesterday and then we have to all keep doing the things that we know work like wearing masks and watching our distance and limiting Gatherings. We can go to the next slide. See, how you know, this? This is difficult. Like I want to acknowledge. This is very difficult. It is difficult for people as human beings. It's difficult for our businesses and we want to reopen our economy as well. We want our families and communities to thrive. We are at this point, two years or two days away from our one year anniversary of the first reported case here in Washington. And we had nearly 300,000 cases of covid-19. In our state, 17,000 of those were hospitalized in nearly four thousand have died off. We are feeling the tension right now on this, in this discussion of managing that deadly disease, and opening the economy. And, you know, I want to remind people, this is not forever. We we do have them on the horizon. In addition to the vaccine as the weather improves. We're going to be allowed to do a lot more because we can do more outside and the changes and the restrictions that we have put in place. I made a difference next slide. Like the states. There's obviously states that are ranked higher than us. Are any of the states ranked higher than us. Do they have indoor restaurants open or do they have indoor restaurants closed? I can I can follow up. I know, I know for both of these metrics which states are higher than us. So I could follow up and get you. That information is like a place like California. That's obviously had the same level of restrictions as Washington state has, but has such a huge explosion. That's what I guess from a Department of Health standpoint. What's the explanation for that? Like for a place like California? Even with all the time restrictions that we have in place? Why do we think that's such an explosion of cases? It's a, it's a good question. I, I have not deeply reviewed their data there. There have been a few articles that have come out about the growth in Southern California in particular. And, you know, there, there was a lot of holiday-related gatherings in, in Southern California, in particular around the Thanksgiving, through the end of December timeframe, that is believed to be a factor, you know beyond. I also want to point out it's not one single factor for any of this. We, you know, it is all of our Collective activity, all of our Collective Mobility, all of our interactions, you know, the virus grows and replicates in US wage. Um, and so, you know, it is it is hard. It is putting all of these things together to slow the spread or or fuel the spread in the case of when you see a surge and yep. It takes all of us working together and you know, it's, it's really difficult. Is there I guess, is there ever been any from a department Health standpoint, the driver an assessment of the risk, like, what you say from like LA County where the long-term closure seem to lead to a lot more people just doing in-home, Gatherings that end up having the reverse effect. I mean, is that something the Department of Health factors in of how long you have the closures for? And do you end up like LA County as a result image something I guess to factor in or not. We we do understand that we have to keep the public with us and the business Community with us. And you know, we do, think that way we want to keep going forward. That is our goal and we want to give people more and more to do as safely as possible. The challenge it is. We're walking a very fine line, right now, our case rates, we are, if you go back one slide where 45th and the nation 4K straights, but our case rates are among the highest. They've been over the year of birth. Pandemic, they're they're not quite at the highest yet, but they're they're closed. And, you know, that's, it's a tremendous burden of disease and we talked to, you know, push that disease level down because vaccines are here, but we get a hundred thousand doses a week. It's going to take several weeks to months before, we have enough of our own now, 65 and older population and highly vulnerable, populations vaccinated to to, you know, prevent the deaths that they are at risk for because of their, you know, and chronic health conditions. So yes, we do Factor, you know, we understand that people are tired of the pandemic. We understand that, we have to keep them with us in terms of compliance and following, you know, our guidance as well as the, you know, restrictions or policies that are in place, you know, and we also offer our goal has been from the beginning and continues to be to try to save as many lives as possible. And we look at that holistically and avoid severe morbidity. And if you go to the next slide, you know, we, we, I mentioned that, you know, nearly 4,000 washingtonians have died. That's, you know, we Very big loss for their families and friends and our communities, but we have done relatively well, as a state. And if you saw there was a New York Times article by Sarah, mervosh, and like Baker and Patricia Matt's. I I think in maybe Mark Walker another author and we recorded the first thirty seven deaths of covid-19 country and we're in Washington state. The first 37 out of out of fifty or Thirty, excuse me, 37 out of the first fifty and through all of the mitigation measures wage, you know, almost a year later or ten months later. We ranked 44th, and they they did the analysis. If the US had followed a model like ours or had a similar death rate, 220,000 people would be alive in the United States today that are not. So I do recognize this as hard. We recognize this is so hard, but we also recognize You know, that we're making a difference and we want to thank washingtonians and we want to thank the businesses for helping us in that mission. And you'll come back to the committee of the states that are, I guess what they're doing the one. And I think either how many are there with my last slide? Senator Mullen cuz I just asked and then we'll go in. Yeah, go ahead and send it over here and then we'll try to get to the okay. This is this regarding Fitness Sanders. So obviously I shut down fitness centers. We can stop screen streaming. Now, you have one person for five hundred square feet, but I question the numbers that will come out positive rates. From people that go to fitness centers versus now, we've got our basketball teams playing and our football teams playing and we know that they have had positive rates coming out of those off. Yet. We continue to do. Let those Athletics, uh, go on still. So why why penalize the business in December? When the numbers aren't there? That maybe that's where the spreads from. Just to clarify high-risk, Sports indoors are they are subject to the same requirements as fitness center. So they can practice in small groups of I think five or six people and and that is because they have there is a risk of spread. So and then football is an outdoor sport. They have to practice Outdoors that they they have a little a little more flexibility. They're not allowed to do competitions, currently a basketball college, basketball players. I mean, you got 10 people on a, on a Thursday Court, that's ninety feet long, and and feet wide. And I don't think that there's only one within a 500 square-foot area or you wouldn't play the game. So understood you're asking about college. I thought so call it the college sports in Washington state that the league has to submit to us, a plan, a mitigation plan, and they are allowed to play because they can take measures above. Beyond what the general public or a high school can can do in terms of very rigorous, screening, testing, protocols, and isolation, and quarantine as needed. So, we review the state reviews of Clans of the college football basketball. Not just those Sports. All of the sports. We review the conference plans. Senators has a question, and then we might try to move on to get to, cuz I know we have a lot of people here to share their stories, and let's go ahead. You're you're coming out for you. Yeah, thank, thank you mister chair. So, you know, I've been really on the front line of this since April being in the National Guard, running these food banks and my wife works in a nursing home. My son was also out there in the food banks and I've had to issue a lot of emergency leave because several my soldiers, their parents died from Colby, leave had whole units, taken out because one person had covid-19 and spread but my my real concern is I think the only way to get out of this is the vaccine but what was shocking is just seeing once offered at least in in the military side, almost two-thirds of our service members. They didn't want to take it, refused the only hit. And and then my wife works in nursing home several for staff. People didn't want to take it which a very shocking and hearing different. Groups were large numbers of individuals, refused to take the vaccine for whatever reason. I'm just wondering what is the plan for educating some of these folks? Cuz I'm kind of the modeling is showing that we're going to get out of this if we take the vaccine, but I don't I don't think the modeling is looking at the fact. So many people are refusing to take this vaccine in a positive example for the world. Yes. I take the vaccine. So Well, first, thank you for your service in the National Guard and in support of our code responsible. We cannot do this without all of the great Partnerships and incredible partnership in particular, with the National Guard. It's a great question. And we, we are, you know, if you saw the announcements yesterday are forty-five thousand a day goal is, so we announced that we need to vaccinate thirty five thousand people a day, in order to reach 70% of the eligible, population in Washington, by the end of June with the vaccine and not not, we think would be, you know, enough to really squash this down. If you will from a Latin perspective, we we are concerned and we do want to make sure that as many people who are eligible for the vaccine. Choose to take the vaccine. We are we we actually started a campaign back in the fall that talks about him. This vaccine works because it's a new type of vaccine and mRNA vaccine. And we have a series of messages that will come out over the next several months. Encouraging, people take the vaccine. We're also doing some work with community outreach, Consultants or contractors from communities of color and different types of your various geographies of across the state and different types of front-line workers. So that trusted voices are standing up and supporting the vaccine and encouraging members of their Community. Just take the vaccine and of course, to the degree possible, really encouraging leaders who are willing to take the vaccine Community leaders people like you. If we happen to get any issue, is in Washington state to be public about taking the vaccine because we have to remember right now. There is not a vaccine for children and children are about a fifth of the population in Washington. So if we really want that herd immunity we need as many of the adults to get back to the native as possible word. We're working really hard on this and and it is top of our mindset of our hubs. Thank you. Thank you so much secretary. Fehrenbach for being here. I really appreciate all your time this morning. I know follow up with states that rank below us. And what's open or not? And so the black folks, we're going to do the restaurants first and I'll just say to people have your comments, the the show your comments, the more time there is for interaction back and forth, but I first went out to Anthony Anton, the CEO of the Washington Hospital Association, then I'll be Sherbert, ho and then Jenny from the owner of, that was fair and Pamela from Icicle Brewing and and Rachel Green. And then go ahead. Thank you, mister chair members of the committee. I appreciate the steering today. Very much and your efforts try to save Main Street, which is in crisis and also unite to beat the virus off. Um, I think we're all aware of how hard Hospitality has been hit. We've all seen the figures of, you know, six figures loss and employment at the height of the virus. In the second quarter of two twenty20, lodging entertainment and full service were down just short of eighty percent of their business year-over-year and as reported back in September, we've already lost over 2000, Hospitality businesses permanently, next slide. And while those are tragic. I think the, the one of the major issues is the tragedy continues and with being closed each month, that we're closed, the debt builds for small businesses. We worked with a company, if you can see your screen now, a m p Services dead. A m p Services has over six hundred clients in the Puget Sound area and they compare people fixed costs in December two peoples fixed costs. A year ago in 2019, and the average restaurant still had about $25,000 of the same costs occurring in the month of December. So for every month that we are open or we're closed. We're a catering, $25,000, in debt. Now that we're going on our third month, just did shut down alone. The average small business is going another $75,000 in debt in full service restaurants. It is just so tough to make a living on these margins and and this recipe for disaster. Can you click on the next slide, please? And yet we know we can operate safely. So we're occuring, these debts. We're seeing all these closings. And yet, we know that prior to November, we'd actually worked with joh, and the governor's office and creating some of the strictest covid-19. We know that a well-regulated restaurant can provide a safe place to gather rather than driving to people as as was said earlier and what we're seeing around the country that without a safe place to go. They're going to be unregulated places and private settings are accounting for one of the major drivers of the virus and then bringing that home and spreading it on our homes. And so we'd like to get back to doing what we're doing. Same lie. In fact, December did provide us a unique opportunity to learn because so many of the states for the whole month or doing something differently. If you can Clinic click on the next slide, please give us a call this the bell curve of capacity. If you look at every state and where they were, that had a mask mandate, so we had a similar isolation similar approach to attacking the virus off, the def perk per per 100,000. You can see the clothes indoor States actually had the second highest rate and states that allowed a safe Outlet. 50% actually were able to lower their number of deaths compared to the other states. There was a lot of mixing these states. These each one of these groups, has a West and East 8th and north and it's nice out a Democrat and Republican. These are mixes. And yet it shows people need a safe place to go. And when we work together, we know we can do this, right. I know there's a lot of questions and I was asked to keep my opening comments that you minutes, so I can allow for questions. So with that Senator anything I can help with. Well, that's a powerful slide. I have not seen that one and definitely, please share that with the committee. That's a really interesting slide and it would be great to actually see the states. I guess that fall into those one of those to your question. Senator States, like, Maine are outperforming us, and they're in that 66%, and then wage in California, New York that we're closed in, in this time frame, you know, we're, we're having much higher divorce rates so I can share that. Absolutely with the committee wage instead of questions for Anthony before we go to the actual. So I think we have Schubert hold the owner of salt and iron in Edmonds. Hi there. Thank you very much senate committee. I'm here to just share my story. I'm sure. He'll I own feed me hospitality and Restaurant Group here in Edmonds, Washington on the chef-owner, with a couple partners of mine. And we have a portfolio about five restaurants in Edmonds alone and a full-service catering business. This shutdown has deeply impacted our business. My family personally wage and over 200. My employees are first shutdown. We laid off about two hundred employees in the second one, subsequently fifty employees there. After, now I'd like to say that the restaurant industry is heavily regulated. We are probably the most regulated with the lease return in any other industry combined. And what we do is we survived, were able to adapt. We're able to follow instructions and we feel that we should be used as a tool to slow the spread of the pandemic. And what else? One example, is that every single server cook dishwasher manager has to go through a health and safety standard test, just to work in a restaurant setting off. That is just the tip of the iceberg of what we as a restaurant industry can can do. We've done many, things like pivot. As you can see behind me. We've built outdoor, dining areas. This is my seventh one again. I am the chef of the company. I'm not a carpenter and I'm doing this myself because I need to do it as for a matter of survival. And I can't afford a carpenter to be honest and pay double the price after materials. So I'm just asking for you guys to move forward in mind, and consider us as a tool just like you consider EMS Personnel, nurses, hospitals, health care workers. We, we are here for you Thursday. Your fight. If you have any questions, I'm here to answer. What's been your sale? Like what's been the change in sales for you? Then from the recent, the closure from November? Now. So for four out of five, my restaurants have collectively, lost money over, almost half a million dollars and, and sales. And let's just say it's 50% and net profit. And one of them is actually profiting only because it we call it our McDonald's of our restaurant portfolio. It is a quick service place and easily adaptable to the situation because of takeout. We, we are in the mode of survival and trying to break free of debt and this, these shutdowns aren't helping. Even though we feel like we need our ones to contribute to the safety standards of those diners. Excellent. Any questions for sugar? Next, we'll go to Jenny the owner of Atlas. Fair in Wenatchee and Jenny. I'm sorry. I'm not attempting to pronounce your last name, but there was a lot of syllables there. Good morning Senators. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today. My name is Jenny Rajan asset in my husband, and I owned two restaurants in Wenatchee, the Thai restaurant and atmosphere founded by my in-laws. In, nineteen. Ninety one. The Thai restaurant has been open for over thirty years. My husband and I took on ownership. Five years ago, the tides, a full-service restaurant with seats. 90 people. We be able to remain open, but to go only Services while our other restaurant atmosphere is currently closed. We spent eighteen months building. Atlas fare only to open on January 4th, 2020 and close 11 weeks later. We have 72 seats Atlas and offer a more fine dining experience. It's a business to add it to the economic growth of our city and one that our local community came out in droves to support when we first opened. Atlas is inside of a multi-story, building with no set up for takeout and no easy access for people to pick it up. Even if we could, we were able to reopen during The Limited occupancy phases. Before shutting down again, Thursday, November. Neither of our restaurants, have the option for outdoor dining or to become an open-air venue. Since March, we've laid off over twenty employees, the impact on my employees and my concern with them, is one of the primary Reasons. I'm here. Today. We consider our employees family and we have a culture of internal promotion and skill-building which results in long-term careers and low turnover. Family of our team have never been on employment want to work and just can't from a financial perspective as an owner. I have two very different restaurants and it makes it very rough at 1 and impossible. At the other Atlas. We're going on a complete closure of over 21 weeks, and this past year and Counting, the bills have not stopped. And even if they were expenses, we could have saved money on even smoke. One's like cable, the moving Target date made that impossible. So we weren't able to adjust effectively the combination of having one business partially open, and working a full-time day job means that I am staying afloat, but every week, we have to reassess what this looks like. There are so many restaurant owners. Couples women first generation families. Have they have one restaurant? They're really not going to keep afloat. Like, what's happened at atlas there. They may not have been able to Pivot or have the resources to do. So dining restaurants are for so many reasons, their job creators, they bring creativity and diverse communities. And there are space where people can safely celebrate from engagements to anniversaries to new business deals. What we need is, the ability to reopen and the confidence that we can stay open. We're opening our choirs intensive Capital inventory, cleaning preparation, re Staffing, and under the state's current plans, the fact that we could open up and then close just Weeks Later, makes it makes it too high of a capital gains. To engage in, we have some of the safer places to meet tables for six feet, apart disposable menus staff and mask sanitation and health checks. Plus, we can regulate traffic through systems life. Reservations when it comes to the Senate Bill 5114. I would say reopening at 25% is going to be very hard for industry, but it's a start that we desperately need to bring some of our employees came back and cut down the losses. Thank you for your consideration. And yes, thank you. Mister chairman and to both Jenny and Schubert. Thank you for your testimony. We appreciate hearing it. I have two questions. Maybe you could respond to one is. Could you describe for us the situation with your, with your rent, your fixed cost with your landlords and how if you have them and how that is work in terms of any kind of abatement and whether you know the PPP or any of the status of order, Once you've been able to obtain and then, secondly, when we talk to Economist early in June, we heard, we talked about states where one side of the in one state, everything was shut down. Another state was open, but the fall off in business was the same in restaurants and Commercial, establishments, et cetera. Because people are not feeling safe. And I guess my question is for that during that period where you were able to operate between say, the the, the first reopening and then the the shutdown and November will you be waiting at the full limits of what was available to you or was your, were you not even at those levels and acid? Yes. Thank you Senator. We are operating to the full limits and we had wage for people to get in. We created safe environments and with the community knowing that we were adhering to everything to keep them safe. They wanted that place to go out to a job. And so, most nights we had booked reservations all night, and we could not have more people come in. And I think reservation systems are one of the unique ways in which restaurants could ensure that we keep the correct traffic flow, and the number of people in our buildings to answer your question about financials. The the bills have stayed the same throughout this entire time. I would say, our landlords have been flexible on paying rent, late wage if needed, but that just puts the buck down the road, that doesn't actually provide any favorite Financial relief PPP. We were one of the first restaurants to get that in April. The stipulations. Then was that you had to spend all by June so that resource completely was depleted very quickly. The best relief we could have is the opportunity to operate our business and to allow the public to make their own decisions on whether they want to come out and dine with us. We we're really proud of the safety standards that we put in place. And we really need this opportunity to reopen our business. Sure. I thought you got back on. Did you want to answer Senator fox question in terms of where you were at compared to? Yes. Yes. We we, so, we utilize. Also. All the tools that we could, and you've reached the extent of those rules for dining capacity. We implemented very safe dining and had industrial-strength sanitizing methods from our dishwashing company and chemicals to sanitize Services. We've also installed air ducting and things like that that you know, killed bacteria germs in the air. But creating a safe space was our ultimate goal and people did feel safe as they came out and we were able to keep instances low. In terms of any covid-19 seeing off and outbreaks. If there were any at all from customers and employees, alike. I'd like to say for the three or four months in the summer time that we were serving customers at 50% capacity job. Not one server caught covid-19. And and Senator, I would say these two stories match. What we hear from the rest of the state October was actually a good month and the creativity and innovation of operators between to go and and trying to find our dining rule ways to work, you know, September and October. We were starting to find a way to make this work with 50% and then to have it removed again was really heartbreaking and not to effectively use triple P. Triple P requires a 60% of that loan is spent on labor. So we need to get open. We need to employ people to actually get the relief to small businesses. And so the as it starts coming available in February that will help moving forward provided we're open. But if we're not open, we are we are missing the true value of Triple B. Let's have a Pamela the owner of Icicle, Brewing, and Leavenworth, and I can say your pretzels are responsible for my dog. Flying being an inch larger than I wish it was for that. Good morning, mister chair and members of the committee. My name is Pamela Place and I'm the owner of ice-cold Brewing Company and mention house and Leavenworth, Washington and my husband Oliver. And I found it mentioned house twenty years ago and I School Brewing Company, eleven years ago, Thursday for two businesses. We currently employ around 60 to 70 full-time and part-time employees and we have unfortunately had to lay off some of our staff this year, and we are full sized Regional Brewery with the Brew Pub. And thank you for this opportunity to share with you the challenges. We have faced as a result of the pandemic for us and also the Washington craft brewing industry, get a whole prior to the pandemic Washington, small and independent brewery's were thriving and a real bright spot for our state and economic impact study off. Our industry gen in 2019. Should that 400 plus Washington small breweries had a one point four billion economic impact to our state. And we directly employ six, three hundred people in good, manufacturing sales and service jobs in rural suburban, and urban areas all across our state more than that. Our state's breweries, are an integral part of our communities. We generously contribute, financially and with, and with their time, to local non-profits and a normal times. Provide a gathering place for people to come together with their families friends and neighbors over locally-made craft beer. The vast majority two-thirds of Washington breweries produced less than 1,000 gigs a year and breweries that size typically are not set up to package their pathetic and so the majority of their beer in their own tap rooms and in caves through limited distribution, to local restaurants and bars. When the first stay-at-home order came in March, most, Washington birth These were in a terrible position with essentially, all of the sales channels, their own top rooms, and the bars and restaurants that carry our beers shuttered. And while there's been a popular name of that, people are drinking more to get through the pandemic. If that's true. It hasn't been to the benefit of Washington breweries data from the LCB shows that sales for Washington breweries were down over 20% in 2020, compared to 2019 and we had a relatively strong January in February of 2020. This drop in sales comes at a time where a significant necessary for survival Investments and things like canning lines. Labor p p p p p e and more has driven our operating costs through the breath. I share this with you today, as one of the soldiers, lucky ones after a huge capital investment in 2019. We built our production facility with the canning mind and our Brewery was set up to can and we have a small bit healthy disdain. Recent footprint throughout the state. You can find our beer in some grocery stores. As a result of hard work and significant capital investment investment in our business, but still, our Taproom and drop-off sales have always paid the bills so that we can grow our Brewery without this study income. Our business has suffered greatly through the pandemic. We have implemented an approach that has prioritized the health and safety of our families and guests over sales and out of an abundance of caution. We have often exceeded the state guidelines for health and safety protocol at times, limiting our own operations and even closing down when they needed for the Hope safety and well-being of our employees. If one of our team members tested positive for covid-19, has Dar business until full sanitation efforts, and negative tests results of all employees followed, and for each occasion that this happened. Not once was there. A single positive transmission at, either of our businesses through the workplace. Thankfully your safety precautions have been successful. People that are businesses and employees have suffered emotional and physical exhaustion through the duration, of the pandemic, the challenges to our business have gone beyond that. Since despite attempts to curb travel, people are still coming to Leavenworth and we are currently limited and how we can serve them and safely and sufficiently meet their needs. We rely on our tourism industry to pay our bills and visit her vital to the survival of our local economy. As a business. We will continue to prioritize the health and safety needs of our employees, guests and Community, even as we continue to experience huge financial losses, but we need your help and attention to survive this crisis. Thank you for listening to my story and the story of other small businesses like mine. I'm deeply concerned for the future of my fellow defendant careers and a local restaurants and bars. Free rely on the urge, you to rise to the challenge to help us save our businesses so we can be there, ready with the tasty Brew to serve our communities in brighter days ahead. Well. You finished within five seconds of the can get. You get the award for my way testimony. Thank you. Very much,. Let's I think we have Rachel brand will be the last person speaking from the restaurant sector Rachel. Hyatt. Mister chair and members of the community. Can you hear me? Okay, we can. Yes. Go ahead. I am Rachel glanced. I'm from Ellensburg. I'm here to represent my own story and read stories of other hard-working members of our state in the restaurant industry. I've been on reduced hours or not been allowed to work since March. I'm a wife and mother of a six-year-old, a four year old and I am 9 months pregnant. I had a registered nurse in the operating room for 7 and 1/2 years until a year ago. When I resigned my position to take a bartending job at night because my husband and I could not afford quality child for them and I both needed for our jobs. And this was a huge personal and financial sacrifice for the security provided for our children. And we were surviving paycheck-to-paycheck until last March. When the country went into lock-down and our situation, our solution for an already difficult situation, became an almost impossible. Way of existing. We have experienced hardships to make ends meet and have seen mistake. And for our friends and our community and with an unanticipated pregnancy old would be delayed 3 entering into the nursing field. When our older children would have both been able to go home because now not only may I be caring for a newborn but our children will have no regular school to go back to unemployment has proven to be confusing and challenging with the first Statewide locked young. There were wrong answers to questions, or help from real people. And the most recent phase of lockdowns. I've had to message the unemployment department weekly to request my claim to be reopened as I am. Clearly still pretty much from working and had delayed payments. And these. Wait times had meant that since March, my family and I have not know when or if we will be able to pay bills and the situation is unacceptable. Filing unemployment with the uncertainties that Iraq has it come with, it is not a sustainable way of life. I request the right to work and the right to provide the stable future for my children that my husband and I so desperately wish to offer them. Our livelihoods, our children. Our existence is impacted in a way that is beyond our control for a dataset. That does not seem to correlate with the covid-19 measures and as a former a larner who spearheaded our hospitals Department of Education Program. I'm more than passingly familiar with sanitation methods and best practices of preventing poor health outcomes for Community. I have nothing but respect for the sanitation practices, following covid-19 guidelines that my place of business and those of my surrounding community of put into place to protect our friends and our family and I asked for Change and a re-evaluation of the situation and I'm grateful for this opportunity for my voice to be heard. You're much as you want to introduce your friend. This is chorus. Even the same height. She just wanted to be a part of it all. Those excellent. Are there any questions for anyone from the Restaurant Group before we move on? Thank you very much, Rachel. A very appreciative enquiry, was very nice to meet you. Okay. The next one is going to be Shiloh. Burgess. She's executive director of the Mat-Su Valley Chamber of Commerce. I think her comment was just, she could speak to a specific topic. I think of just the parts of the state. They didn't go to face to the majority of the state. They'd go to phase two back in June. But there was a segment of the state that stated stays 1.5. I think I'm going to be Shiloh's remarks. Ciao. Thank you. Mister chairman and members of the committee. Yes, for the record. My name is Sheila, Burgess, and I am the executive director of the Wenatchee Valley Chamber of Commerce. Just a little context for the chamber. We have served businesses in both Chelan and Douglas counties since the beginning of the pandemic, working very closely in partnership with our local health district produced resources to help businesses. Is support their employees, protect their customers and understanding the changing regulatory environment as a chairman stated. My hope today is to present some of the universal challenges facing the employers and employees located in chelan-douglas. Benton-franklin in Yakima. Counties who remained in Phase One or modify used one until October 13th, when they were collectively, moved into phase two. So in 2012 or any restaurants fitness centers. Entertainment business has many of the folks you're hearing from today in these counties face, the most restrictive, opening opening environments in the state fitness centers in these counties on averaging, eleven weeks of regular operations, six weeks of modified operations, and thirty five weeks of closures, entertainment businesses, like movie theaters, or bowling. Alleys on average had 11:00. We bought a regular operations for weeks of modified operations, and thirty seven weeks of closures restaurants in these counties on average had eleven weeks again of regular operations 21-month. Weeks of modified operation and twenty two weeks of closures. This has resulted in significant long-term unemployment in these counties. And when looking at the major cities in these five counties, the choice, they reported up through November that on average will start with Wenatchee. Our unemployment rate has been 9%, which is up from 5.25% in 2019. Yeah, reporting an average of 9.3% of unemployment throughout the year up from 6%. In 2019. Kennewick is reporting an average of 8.4% of unemployment and 20 GHz up from 5.4%. In 2019. Richland is reporting an average of 7.7% unemployment up from 4.6% in 2019. And Pasco is reporting on average 9.1% of unemployment up from 6.4% in 2019. However, when these five counties were moved into phase, two were all businesses were able to operate unemployment reducing Difficultly in October of 2020. Unemployment rate in the same five cities, the major metropolitan areas for these counties in Wenatchee. It was 5.8% in Yakima was 5.9% off of work. It was 5.5% in Richland. It was 4.7% in in Pasco was 5.7%, But sadly since the new shutdown order issued on November 15th, twenty two thousand, two hundred twelve people have filed new unemployment claims in these counties alone. These layouts have psychological and physical impacts on the people who experience them and the families, they are part of everything from depression. Anxiety, negative perception of self work to weight gain Safety Services, and heightened stress and conflict within their family systems. And I would like to argue that these individuals deserve the same level of support protection and commit to get them back to work as we are putting into protecting people from this virus job creation. In rural counties, in Washington, state happens at a significantly slower Pace than Washington's, Urban counties and retaining these jobs. Of our business closes is difficult and time-consuming accordingly. It's even more important in these regions of all businesses. In our state, have the opportunity to open safely and as quickly as possible, if we're going to save as much money as of these jobs as possible. So here's a few thoughts about how you can assist businesses. Need a consistent in particular. And predictable regulatory environment to plan against the current plan does not provide this for them businesses need cash flow and access to Capital business, has the relief programs that have been helpful and critical lifelines, but our businesses have not had the access to cash flow with the velocity. They need to be sustainable businesses. Need customers who are confident that they are safe. Businesses have been incredible Partners in developing and implementing the health guidance issued by the CDJ and state doah. We need everyone. Championing. How business is across the state have become protectors and not infectors. If our businesses are going to survive this pandemic. They need your help to help retain jobs in our home. Entities, especially these that have been disproportionately impacted because they remained in a modified phase 1.5 for so long. We need them to all be allowed to open safely and sustainably, providing a more predictable regulations for their operations in this pandemic. Giving them clear and timely communication when issuing regulatory or health changes that will impact their businesses and employees and ensuring that they are not saddled with increase wage increases in taxes fees that impede their ability to hire their employees fax. So I'm going to conclude my comment there and welcome, any questions from the committee. So what was the game between 1.5 ending and then the closure with it? Like a five-week gap between when they're allowed to go to phase two and when things were, it was less than that. We thought we were moved into phase two on October 13th. And then we were closed back down on November 17th. And so, for some businesses, it took them several weeks, to get their staff back trained and their facilities off. Rational and so they didn't even get the full opportunity to operate for those four weeks. Thank you very much. Trial. Oh, okay. The next group is from the Fitness sector and so we have Larry. Mchaney and then Shelly stock, number Bainbridge, Athletic Club, and Jerry McMillan from the, she's a personal trainer in Vancouver and Brad, Schwartz from Fitness Quest and Blair off-centered. Mullet committee. Thank you very much for the opportunity. My name is Blair McKinney. I'm president and CEO of Confluence, Fitness Partners. We operate to health clubs in the Wenatchee Valley, one in full in phase one point five. Counties one in Chelan County one in Douglas County. You think I'm from Wenatchee by the way, based on the committee testimony so far. We're heavily Wenatchee for represented. I like it, but life, or we've had nine months of zero Revenue in our clubs, in the last year. I have signed a forbearance agreement with my bank, after not missing a single payment and never being late and still have not. But they've come to me and said that your cash flow is out of compliance with your covenants. Therefore. We need to renegotiate and a lot of businesses like mine are put into this spot. And that is that that economic ecosystem that's happening with those Banks. Just having a massive impact on a lot of small businesses. We started with about 74 employees. When we closed in March about 36, those were full-time equivalents. We were down to two employees during the lockdown. Jenny was spot-on. When talking about, how the how the PPP money went. Same with us courage under we're operating with five hundred square feet per person. That's about 10% capacity. We brought back about 30 employees about seven full-time equivalents. So it'll be a very slow ramp back. I'm also log President and CEO of software company called mxms. Stands for member experience metrics. We work specifically in the fitness vertical, we are partly owned by a publicly traded company called Black Dahlia. To the last six years. We have worked with data in the fitness industry. Globally. We have customers and Brazil, the United Kingdom, Finland US, Canada. During the lockdown 98% off. Those customers were shut down within about a two-week period globally MXN. Became the Nexus of data collection for understanding as clubs open and collecting data on check-ins, virus Sergio's within those check-ins and became part of the research team for Versa versus the international Health racket in sports club Association. I spearheaded the work with the University of Oregon in analyzing check-in data along with outbreak data and cache data for the University of Colorado. I've been involved in working with the New York State Fitness Alliance and Governor Cuomo's team, California. Fitness Alliance, Arizona, Nevada in July. I realized that I should probably hit take some of our data and some of our efforts and bring them here to the state of Washington. We stood up to Washington Fitness Alliance in July, we quickly had about three hundred members in the Washington Fitness Alliance and started working. The governor's policy. Team just said stays safe safety standards part of the safe standards team that with Ursa. They created the active and safe Start program, which we are apart. As are most of the jobs, in the state of Washington. I serve on the global Health and Fitness Alliance committee for research and always offered myself up as a resource to the governor's office. We have brought clear data, clear facts about our industry. And it's and it should be no secret as to why the current outbreaks coming out of the fitness industry. They're clear, he's dead. Why that happens right now? I'm very concerned about the studios in our state studios, are not able to operate in this phase one. And at the very beginning at the beginning of this in Phase to those Studios, like, you'll hear from in a minute, operated safely for the entire time when large clubs couldn't open now, larger clubs are open in. Our studios are closed. I'll stop right there with respect to time and and in case there's any question, There any questions or where Senator Wilson? Hope Senator Wilson, you're on mute. Let's shoot where I do have a question. You said that you had been working with the governor and during the course with your information. Have you been at the table recently with this five hundred square foot, requirement mostly become that's a great question. Cuz most of it become reactive early on the way. We're. We're really involved in the whole process and they were including us in the process and helping to actually write some of the, some of the guidance because we understand operations that worked well and that that is really what God larger clubs to be able to open and phase two months ago. Back in I forget it was maybe July early August. We also work to help move the move health clubs has 1.5 an interface Point phase two, as time has gone on that process has seemed to change. It's more of just a recording back to you know back to us process where there was engaging. To kind of help Define the guidelines. It's now more, you know, somebody's going in a room and deciding and then coming back to us and saying, here's the guy that we've been able to do a few tweaks, but mostly around, for example, this latest guidance was that, you know, know, workouts longer than 45 minutes. We got them to say less than an hour so that they could understand really how our it systems work and help people track laborer and Illinois College cetera. Can I have a follow-up chair? Yeah. Okay. So Blair, I know that I think throughout I've been, I've been hearing that a lot of the fitness centers were upgrading their HVAC systems and you know, like to the help HEPA filters and I've kind of been reading about that. So could you let how many have done that? I know that's like was a great expense. Yeah. Most and one of the things I want to point out is that health club by their design, we've been dealing with respiration for a long time. So, when are HV, AC systems are designed those engineer's come in and they look at your 100% occupancy rate, based on a code, which you never had. They look at that. And they look at people exercising at an extremely high heart rate during that time, then they design your HP AC systems around that. So for example, in my own clubs in the winter, we should turn over one hundred percent of the are six times an hour. We use Murph 13 filtering. We've invested about $157,000 in our to clubs just to add what are called are fixed systems. That just infection. That's even coming coming through those systems in the summer. We turn the air over 10 to 15 times an hour in those systems health clubs, fight design, have over-engineered hvhc. So when I hear them inside activity is dangerous, it's not that binary. It's just not that binary and health clubs have been able to mitigate that and deal with this better than anybody. That's one of about ten really good reasons why they're bouncing outbreaks coming from helpless. Thank you very much. We have Shelly Stockman from the Bainbridge Athletic Club, please. Shelly, go ahead. Good morning, and thank you everybody for your time. And for listening to the stories from our industry. I really do appreciate it. My name is Shelly Stockman. I operate a health club on Bainbridge Island and I guess what makes it our story may be a little bit unique is that we are a very big resource in a relatively small community. And when we are out of service, it really takes a lot of services and a lot of air out of the community. We had had sixty employees were now reopened again with about half of that. We had to lay most people off on the first round of closure on the second round of closure. We tried to keep everybody. I couldn't stomach laying people off during the holidays when there was no Aid, so we bore that expense and kept everybody working as much as we could through the end of the year song. The type of member that we serve here is everything cradle-to-grave we have toddlers in here. We have a full, we have indoor tennis courts. We have a pool. We have a gymnasium that that that we offer up to the community for their youth sports practices. We have I mean, I've had people in my chair and here saying hey I had diabetes. I have to have this facility open to to maintain good health. Can I can I get a doctor's note or anything? And I've had to say no to all of that. I think that one of The Mists numerous about our community, our industry is is that we just get to fit fitter and we don't we do that really well, but we also save lives. We also get people off their medication and we also help them meet friends. We also give them a sense of belonging in a sense of community and what's happened. Since the closure is not only have we lost about 50% off. Calling of our customer and of our staff, but we've also had to let go of our janitorial crew, which is a mom and a pop that lives in the community. We've had to say. We took sorry carpet cleaner. We don't need you anymore. In a lot of our vendors, have suffered, because of this, and a lot of other businesses in our community that we hope support have suffered as a result of our closure dead. We've done all the things that that Blair just mentioned. I don't know of any operator that hasn't done all the PPE, all the Plexiglas, all of the air, scrubbers. They've taken their their life p, p money and put it to really good use to try to keep people safe. We didn't have any outbreaks and we were open. We had a member. In fact, get cold it at home and come here. Mm like tennis well before she knew that she was positive played with 12 different people and no one got sick. And so I know that we can keep people safe and I guess just last month. Will you want to ask you just to understand the entrepreneurship is really really really hard. I I personally twenty years ago put all my life savings into this club and borrowed millions of dollars to try to make a difference in a community and entrepreneurs in general are really greedy Creative Group, and we just want to help with this Thursday. You want to put our resources behind the state and behind all of you to decision-makers and work in partnership with you to try to save lives. We know that Health saves lives. We know that this pandemic doesn't affect healthy people, as much as it does vulnerable people, and we just want an opportunity to do what we do best, which is our business is run them safely and help save people. Thank you. Excellent. Is there any questions for Shelly before we next is Sherry McMillan and Sherry's a personal trainer in Vancouver. Hello everybody. Thank you so much for this opportunity to speak and share my experience. My name is Sherry McMillan and I've been in the fitness industry for 30 years, owner of Northwest, personal training in Vancouver. Washington is a small training studio. And we're actually celebrating our twenty first anniversary this very month in 2020 was definitely the hardest year that I have ever experienced in my professional career. I have never worked so hard to survive and provide some level of essential service to our clients considering we've been closed or severely restricted for the majority of the Year. Specifically, we've experienced a $275,000 loss in revenues and 20/20 which is a really significant amount of money for small business. The income of all Seventeen of my team members have been severely reduced throughout the entire year. Two of my employees have left, the fitness industry for good job. They, you know, just decided they're not no longer confident in their, you know, ability to work in the fitness industry for the long-term and they see no light at the end of the tunnel. And so they've gone into other professional. One of my employees was never able to even access unemployment. This, this whole year other really big concerns are just the impact to client confidence in long-term business. Viability first. It's important to note that our services are essential to our clients. It's not about a six pack. I think sometimes that's the perception, it's about vanity and a six pack, and it's not, it's not essential Services. The average age of our clients is fifty years old. We service clients recovering in overcoming breast cancer heart disease, Parkinson's just various disabilities, obesity, diabetes injuries and so many other elements. And when I think about the long term of not only my business that our industry we've got, we're dealing with extended closures. We're dealing with the dog. Certain G, you know, of, of the future of, of our business, and the industry, and just the unpredictability of the mandates going week-to-week and having to decide, what can we do next week. We have no idea how long it just makes it so incredibly challenging to plan. And, you know, the fitness industry has been disparaged throughout this whole process by Joseph consumers, you know, regularly that were not safe and that's just not true. When you look at the data in the science and reports, we are not unsafe, and it will be an uphill battle to regain client confidence. Encourage them to return to gyms and into fitness facilities. 20% of Fitness facilities have already closed for Good in our state and across country, which will have devastating long-term consequences to the health of our state. The mandates are destroying the entire health and fitness industry, which is the absolute last thing we should be doing drugs. Health crisis initially, the closure was for two months. We personally use that time and tens of thousands of dollars to restructure our entire facility to get ready to reopen wage and with very strict safety. Protocols in place. We reopen the beginning of June. We upgraded our HVAC system completely cleaned out our decks. We created individual workout stations for all of our clients and trainers. So there was no cross-contamination between equipment. In between clients. We added barriers between equipment. We reduced capacity to 25%, We had sanitation protocol. We did Temp, and checks of staff. And clients. We offer group classes virtually and Outdoors of to come out of the indoor settings. So we were just focusing on private one-on-one training. Our team was so diligent and we experienced some cases among staff and clients the entire time that we're open. So it was absolutely shocking and so disheartening and devastating when we were closed again in November 2nd closure home. Even more challenging because now there was no PPP funding available in December and January in our business and in the fitness industry as as a whole are the most critical time periods for our business time. We were shut down. We take covid-19 seriously. And we always always, always have been in the fitness industry. One hundred percent committed to the health of our community like this. This is what we do which is why we need to be open so that we can be part of the solution. All the science proves that our service has helped to keep people healthy and actually reduce the risk of succumbing to all disease and illness. Including covid-19 was, you know, just a recent study that showed that in the mile Clinic proceedings. Just recently January 20-21. Proved that fit individuals are less likely to be hospitalized due to covid-19. The data shows that we are doing a great job executing safety, protocols, the Washington State Department of Health L. And I show that gyms are not the source of spread, the Washington State outbreak report shows and does not identify that Fitness facilities are source of outbreaks. We're just not part of the problem or part of the solution. It makes no sense to penalize, a sector that according to data science and studies has not been a source of covet and has proven that it can safely, provide a valuable service to the public. During a health endemic. It does make sense that people need a safe and took place to exercise and focus on their physical and mental health, their stress relief and their immune system. All critical things now more than ever. Thank you so much for listening. That's excellent. Thank you very much. Sherry. The next one, and this is the last person. The fitness space is Brad. Schwartz Fitness Quest in Puyallup and hover, correct. Thank you mister chair Senators. My name is Brad, Schwartz. I owned to fitness centers in piercing, King County. I formerly owned Vision, Quest, Sport and Fitness, which was a large just privately held fitness centers in the Puget Sound area. So those to LA Fitness and we had 540 employers and we were voted best of Western Washington three years in a row in a suit company that we started in piercing King County. We had a hundred and fifty employees. We previously had 540. Our customers are all ages from age for all the way to a half with this closure. I adjust invested. Six million dollars on to new locations. One in the Auburn area and one in the birth. Area really beefing up. The HP AC nothing in my 40 years of experience. Prepared me for a closure of five months starting to new businesses. As many of the other people that stated, it's hard enough to be an entrepreneur without all these other obstacles. The impact for us, we had to lay off a hundred and fifty employees virtually everybody and on the second closure. I've been a business forty years, 20% of my best employees went other places because of the fear of not being able to get their jobs back in the fitness industry. We suffered 65% loss of Revenue of 2020 / 2019. Twenty 20% of our employees will not be coming back. I consulted with Stephen chernetsky. He was a consultant for track and field Olympics, and to State, again and reiterates. And what part of the solution, not part of the problem. Exercise stimulates the immune system. The opposite is also true sedentary Lifestyles increase virtually all diseases. So when we talk about building the immune system increase, the body's exercise at the absolute best thing you can do to accomplish them. People lose Fitness quickly studies in the fitness industry have shown adverse metabolic and physiological changes occurring after two weeks of decreased exercise. You've heard in Phase phrase use-it-or-lose-it. Research has shown that the reduced activity, reduces blood volume circulation of blood and the reduction of the antibodies that help fight these viruses. most of us are a part of ABC Financial, which is a vendor during the pandemic. They invested eighty million dollars of a tracking system for members on their egress and egress in New Jersey. So we are able to unlike a lot of businesses minutes, a minute. We know how many people are in our clubs and how many people are leaving our clubs in this entire five months? Shut off. And through the whole pandemic, my two Outlet clubs had zero cases. My Bowling Center in the Puyallup area had zero cases. Rush. We feel that we're part of the solution. We feel that we're one of the safest places in the world to be. If you work out twice a week, statistically nationally, statistics show that you're the boss 1% of America's far as Fitness. So we're one hundred percent Mass compliant. We check temperatures coming into the facilities are employees, checking temperatures, and being a part of the month, Washington, Fitness Alliance. We are absolutely compliant to all the PPE. The PPP was a drop in the bucket for most of us and it was very hard choice. This moving Target to decide how many employees were going to bring back and then how many we had to terminate again and your startup sometimes takes more operating Capital than just staying Club trying to guess of when we're going to go back to some type of normalcy. At 25% is at least give us a fighting, start to get back into business and start to get the flow of business. Thank you. And if there's any questions have reserved a little time for questions. Three questions for bread. I get that was excellent. Thank you very much for sharing your story and that wraps up the comments from the Fitness industry off next. We're actually going we're only focused on the businesses that were impacted by the November closures. So next is going to be museums and this is Patty Belmonte. She's executive director of the month on Children's Museum here in Olympia. Yes. Hello. Thank you. And I do have some slides next slide. Just wanted to give you an overview there about 8. Children's Museums in Washington state. 300 nationally in 2019. We served are we had our best year, two thousand, three hundred twenty-three thousand visitors. So, with two closures and limited reopening, it's been a really last year was a very tough here. Like the author's comments that you've heard. We felt really strongly that there was misperception about Children's Museums kids touch a lot of things in Children's Museums, and we've been serving them in a healthy way for many years. Next slide. We were very proactive about trying to reopen the museum because we know that children under the age of eight don't learn. Well, through a digital media. We, what you may not know is that many Children's Museums Also Serve large percentage of low-income and underserved families. And so we maintained that commitment through the closure. We're also been doing and have been doing alternative service for with steam creativity kits. 8,000 have gone out from this Museum alone. Next slide. One of the things that all of us thought about in our re-opening was that we were going to do it on based on best practices. This is just an example of the healthy advisory committee that we put together a prior to opening and has been with us the entire year next slide. Obviously, just like, all the other Industries, you've heard from. We had to assess our facility. We did the same kinds of Investments. We are a non-profit, all the Children's Museums in Washington State art, and we put a lot of money into reopening the first time and we expect we will have to do a little bit more for the reopening second time next slide. We partnered with others, like Mary Bridge and MultiCare for the healthy family, entry station. We started it from the outside so that the expectations were set next slide. Just like with restaurants. We're using mandatory pre-registration and to our time to entry sessions as a way to manage. How many people are in the building where keeps people moving? We keep air flow air flows maximized and because we're dealing with kids and families and vulnerable population. We have a covid-19 is ordering all open hours next slide. The thing that worries a lot of people is how many props there are and in our case and other Children's Museums, we had to remove about half the props off of The Flash. And we are going by the model that guest center with Clean Hands. We only allow the same group of people in for 2 hours break, free product in the place is replaced in the 30 minutes between sessions and all day. Long, Our Cafe has turned into a props washing station and so faith in the outdoor props because we have an outdoor space. Are are rotated each night next slide. One of the things we do is solicit feedback from visitors and staff to see how they feel about the safe environment. We're providing when we do get strongly disagree. It typically is a protest against wearing face. Coverings or following protocols. Next line. Feedback has been positive very positive throughout the whole four months that we were able to reopen much as you've heard from the other Industries. Next, slide off next slide. So the challenge like the others that you've heard from is that Children's Museums are about 75% earned Revenue in the state and we were down, 84% off a year between March and December are contributed Revenue, held study. We started with about eighty-five employees prior to covet. And I now have about 36,000 many of our lines have business were suspended during this time. Next slide and I can answer any questions. For when were you able to reopen this summer? You able to reopen in June know we waited till July, just because we were a little nervous about public perception and we wanted to make sure we had everything right. I got it. November live, through November 7th. But we were, as you saw, we were extremely reduced capacity. We were only about 15 to 20% of our, our building offering any one session. Gotcha. And if you have any so we're there, any outbreak cases related know during that four months. There was a worked closely with the health department and there was not a single case, reported back, either through staff or through visitors to the museum. Okay, and I think just listening to everybody today. I mean, we know that there are there are businesses that that are perhaps needs some work, but I think most of us went into this to say, how can we protect the people, we serve, and the people that work for us and we feel like we've come up with some pretty good ways to do it. So, we're hopeful that when we do reopen, we have some assurance that if we're following and we're in compliance that we won't have to shut down again. It seems like a fair request. Thank you very much. Kind of get rid of you very much,. Yeah, if there's any questions, I museums Patty is your person, a obviously, we had a lot of museums throughout the state impacted. But yeah, just given time we we only were able to hear from one Museum. The next is going to be bowling. We have Bill Frederick from Chalet Bowl in Tacoma. Good morning, everybody. You do not look like The Big Lebowski, but go ahead. Make you good morning Senators. First off. I like to put my heart and thoughts out to everybody who's been affected from covid-19. This throughout this past year. My name is Billy Frederick, like, many of my colleagues. I'm a second-generation bowling proprietor since Nineteen Eighty-Four. My family's owned and operated Washington's. Oldest Bowling Center, show, label, and Tacoma, which was established in nineteen forty-one. It's been eleven months since initial shut down in March, and bowling centers. Have only been allowed to operate for two and half of those months. Actual label or Revenue was down 65%. From 2019 for perspective are bowling all I needed to host two hundred million dollars a week to cover our fixed costs choices. The only source of income for my father, my wife and I, as we poured ourselves into the family business, you've gone months without paying ourselves tapped into savings and have a personal line of credit off. Thankfully. We were issued approval for my financial institution and we did not have to pay our monthly milk for three months. And my wife and I received a six-month for business on our home mortgage. Before the shutdown, the bowling industry in Washington employed, 2500 people because of the shutdown, ninety percent of those employees have been forced to collect unemployment benefits and our team actually has been reduced from 9 to 0 under the new healthy wash and reopening plan bowling. Centers are only allowed to have six people six people from the same household at a time in our facilities. Not only does not align with any social. Didn't seem protocols set up by the CBC. It's not sustainable. Going back to our comments from the Fitness. Folks. If you want to compare that Fitness, they're allowed to have one person per five hundred square feet. And again, we're allowed to have six people in our facility. On our roads are bowling centers are twelve thousand two thousand square feet which provides ample space for that proper social distance. You needed. This new plan also creates so much uncertainty due to the week. By week, assessment of each Regional District wage. This concerning is imaginable for most households. Let alone businesses that are reliant on so many, the bowling center who are allowed to open this year. We did so at a reduce occupancy, a 34-page keep in mind that was only eleven weeks that we were allowed to operate. We're here to CDC guidelines along with some of the industry's most strict covid-19 policies and procedures which were all approved by the governor's office. Not one outbreak was reported from our facilities about 145, other states have proven to make bowling work during this pandemic. Why can't Washington my family? And I desperately want to bring my team members back serve, our community is support our vendors and fortunately. Under this new plan. There is no predictability on when or for how long you'll be able to stay open. And closing, you know, our family has gone through four recessions. And this is the first time, since March, I have real doubts of the survivability of Chalet, but also the entire industry for Washington State. When we get into phase two, there's no clear guidance on how long you expect to operate at 25% and quite frankly, for some of us. It will make sense to reopen finally Senators, my family and colleagues are fighting for our livelihoods feel. It's right. I urge you and your fellow Senators, the past Senate Bill 5114. So we have a fighting chance to bring back our staff, support our community, and keep our dreams alive. I'd like to thank you for your time and consideration. You very much Billy. Thank you very much. That was very powerful. Thank you. We also have. Under bowling as well. We have Eddie Williams, the viola, queens and Spokane, and, and I realize I skipped over and cook for movie theater. So, and we're going to go back to you after the comments from any typos home. Start video the morning. Thank you Senator. I appreciate the time, like, Billy. I run the bowling center over here in Spokane, Washington. I've been a fifteen years. We have the largest bowling center on the Eastern side of the state and like Billy said, you know, this industry is a pillar in a lot of communities. We provide a lot of things for for special needs. We host Special Olympics for our facility, prior to March 16th. We we were hosting and entertaining a thousand League pose a week that does not include open played. That does not include birthday parties. We were a facility, a destination for a lot of people on a weekly basis league bowling is taken for granted, in in that people don't understand the social aspect of what bowling does in a community. And it brings so many people together. And with with that being said, the opportunity, when we shut down the first time, it gave us a chance to reassess our business. We did a lot of improvements. Wage sanitized. We we did our facility. We redid our flooring. We made it so that our facility was going to be a safe place for people to come in and they were going to see the investment that wage did for them. For the safety of all, of our, all of our participants. We have special needs groups. We have seniors, we have kids. And what we wanted to do was providing a safe environment for them to come into. And during that time. We had a very, very positive outlook in the future of bowling because we knew that we could do what it took to make sure that I'm not part of the solution. And so, being close 452 days. We felt very good when we had the opportunity to reopen. And when we did reopen, we reopen. 17% off. And that's two people per rain or where thirty two Lanes, Bowling Center. That's not a lot of people. And yet, we figured out how to survive we had. We have such a great support system in our community here in Spokane that we're able to tread. We survive during that time. The second closure really hurt us because we took from forty employees down to 7, like Billy said, six people it's unrealistic. If in our facility which we have thirty thousand square feet, six people. You can't tell what's going on in our building. But you know, our community requires and desires us to be here. And soon as we reopen at just six people, they were here. So we know the power of what we offer because we do fundraisers. Like I said, hosting Special Olympics annually, having special needs groups. Come in, they need their phone number. Exercise they enjoy this. This is what they look forward to once a week, you know, our league Bowlers. We have a lot of seniors. This is what they look for to once a week. They come in socializing with her friends. They wear their masks. We're extremely safe. We socially distance naturally because the lane beds allow us to socially distance. This is a great choice, great industry across the country and across our state. And we offer so many things to the locals that. No other industry can offer, you know, kids come here. This is entertainment. It's inexpensive is built to withstand a number of different things. Pandemic aside. This is a recession-proof industry. And so the challenge of operating with just six people is is quite daunting, but it at 25% if we have that opportunity right now, I think going into the summer we would have a fighting chance to survive off. And that's what we're looking for. Did you have any outbreaks? Eddie during the time you were open for that? Brief period have any outbreaks, we did have a couple of people who did come in require, did find out that they've just a positive and we at one one day we did shut down because we were concerned and we took the aggressive nature of shutting down re cleaning our facility and re-opening but we've never had anyone come in and actually test positive from our facility, but we're there any. Was there any transmission from the person who bought said no, okay. Excellent. Getting a frog. Has a question. Yeah, thank you. Thank you. This is Tim Mister Williams and Mister, Mister Frederick. I believe the change in looking at the phase one guidance for indoor Recreation and fitness establishments. The the limitation was Theory, you're saying is 6, it indicates, and maybe this one month. Special rules that they they put out one customer athlete for five hundred square feet. If you've got thirty thousand square feet wouldn't that? I guess I'm a little confused. And how many people there's going under those guidelines. There's a separate guideline that I'm missing. Well, I will share with you. What? I heard, the answer I was given as to why we were received six people, was because they wanted to be consistent with restaurants. That makes jokes to us, but but but you have a 30,000 square-foot facility. So you presumably, you could have ten, you could under that one for 500 feet. You should have more than that. Obviously, how well we have thirty eight people. If you give us one for $500, Senators, we were, we were put into category under museums and libraries. That's where we're playing under. I see, I see that's a different standard. Okay. Thank you. Brad, that you have a comment for the committee as yes. Thank you. Mister chair. I am in the unique spot of owning fitness centers in a bowling center that started in nineteen fifty-three not been to the owner of the bowling center for two years, just to confirm. The bowling centers are not in the same category of Fitness at one person for five hundred square feet. Think was the question. It's six people talk in the entire facility. That's 1% of our normal occupancy. Fitness centers are approximately 10% of that occupancy right now and have them both facilities Fitness and the bowling centers. The bowling centers have followed, the PPE, 100% masks 1% of the time. And the patience is about fifteen feet with the bowling lanes, between the people, and Governor Inslee didn't get it right. Where he had said everybody gathers together together in around seating dead. To go over this course, we have electronic scoring and we keep people fifteen feet apart. So the fitness industry is very safe bowling by itself off is much safer than that. So just to get us into the one person for five hundred square feet. When really help the bowling industry, at least parallel to the fitness industry off. Okay, that's very helpful. Thank you very much. I appreciate your comments that the final word person. We're going to hear from charity to have another comment for the ICC. Yeah. Sorry. I was just going to mention. I'm not sure if this is applicable at all, but I think for us in the fitness industry, probably any other business that has been severely restricted is dead. The, the criteria is so different from industry to Industry. Like I was able to, I had to fly for work just recently, and I was just sitting there as a business owner, and I'm sitting with an inches of strangers, birth. Hours at a time in, in the plane, people allowed to, you know, eat and drink. If they take their mouths off and it can be. So you try to stay positive, you know, like we're all positive in the fitness industry, but when I go to different businesses, whether it's like here, Home Depot. And there's thousands of people department stores, hundreds of people, thousands of people that are going through and it's such high volume and no one sanitizing in between in it. It just seems so unfair, when we are part of the solution and there's so many other industries that are allowed to operate, just give us a fair. Fighting chance to do what we do. It's a fair. Okay. Thank you very much for that. The last we're going to hear from us and cook. She's with Wenatchee Productions, Corporation and Port Angeles. Home. When actually from the movie theater site and go ahead. Sorry. I skipped over you on the line. Good morning, Senators. My name is an odd book. I live in Wenatchee. Actually, my father started our family business over almost fifty years ago. Now, when he bought his first theater in Port Angeles, that's where I grew up. We expanded over here to Wenatchee and I've remained here we are now Wenatchee Productions corporation, which is doing business as Sunday in theaters. We have to cinema complex as in Wenatchee. And one in Port Angeles, currently all that have been closed since March wage. Except for a few days in November prior to the March 2020. Shutdown, we had around seventy employees some full-time many part-time. Our customers were members of those communities and also a few tourists being in both these areas. We also rely heavily on the tourism industry. Pardon me, excuse me. In 2020. We operated until the March shutdown. Not opening again until November in Wenatchee. We had six days of operation off before we were shut down. And in Port Angeles, we had nine days. It's a major ramp up to put an operation like this and get it back open again. So it took some time and my family had to travel to Port Angeles. Get that one open and then come over back to Wenatchee to open our Cinema here. It's very intense life family-oriented business impacts of being shut down. Our have been devastating to our company, to our family financially, emotionally, the whole thing. The impacts of being shut down. Also was very difficult for our employees. We were continually to provided, our healthcare insurance, to our key employees who were full-timers and had opted into that wage. Just recently had to make the very difficult decision to discontinue because we're just out of money and we really want to be here when the light is back on track in theaters. It's going to be tough. We need to be able to reopen and bring some Revenue in. You know, when we open and November. We adopted the cinema safe. Protocols, which is, it was developed nervous. Oh wait, there is somebody doctor be gone. I'm sorry, go ahead and no problem. So when we reopen for those few days in November, we adopted our Cinema safe protocols, which were veloped by our national theaters Association Owners Association. I should say. They had an epidemiologist provide information on how wrong. Do this safely protocols to put in place? We did do that during those few short days that we were open. Thursday is very encouraging that on the January, 14th outbreak report from the Department of Health shows that since June 1st, which we were not open at that point. But since then, there were zero, reported outbreaks in movie theaters here in Washington state. We feel it's a very safe environment for people to wreckreate in Georgia, and we were very encouraged by our customers turning out in support when we were able to open and tell us how much they've missed the opportunity to be their life. Obviously, they had confidence to come back and, you know, support us or they wouldn't have been there. We wouldn't have been talking with them. So we were encouraged by that song. Um, we need to reopen so that our customers and our employees can be in a safe environment, get away from reality, for an hour, or two months, and I feel that's kind of something that's, we've all been missing in this whole pandemic. And we were, would love to be the the, an opportunity for people to do that off. Our concern is like, you've heard from the others is sustainability and to ramp up, open only to shut down again, in a few weeks is Was devastating again, financially. It was another hit. We spent a lot of money getting there are p. P. P, p e. And I'm moving in the right direction and I see I'm out of time, but I just don't, okay. You have a couple if you have another minute, if you have anything else still. Okay, thanks. I just feel it's really important for all of our communities customers employees and just business owners as a whole that we began operating. Again. I I feel that we can, we've already proven that we can do it safely. And I think if we all pull together and do this, it can be done in a safe manner. I'm just really I guess I can say I'm disheartened that if this goes on too much longer we're gone, and these communities will have no movie cinema. I know it's not an essential life, maybe gyms or other kind of services, but I think it's very important. I think our communities have proven that they want us there, but we will not be able to withstand much more. We've exhausted all of our resources. Luckily. We had a rainy day. Fund has gotten this this far, but that's gone home. So it's, it's it's just very heartbreaking for us as a family. And it would be difficult to face our employees in our customers and say that we're gone for good. I hope it doesn't come to that. So, Thank you very much. And I really appreciate your comment. Senator. Wilson has a question. Yes. Thank you mister chair. And do you know, we know that there's forty-seven States right now that are open to restaurants. Do we know across the states that are open. Now, how many what the positivity rate for arm the theater package are zero, there's about a third of the theaters that have opened across the country where they've been allowed to do. So, I'm in a very, you know, capacity controlled. It's different from area to area but we are updated weekly and there has been zero a.m. Every every update we get there has been zero. Okay. Well, thank you. Thank you very much. An and I know a lot of the people who testified today are still aligned, so I just want to give our thanks. I appreciate you taking the time to share your stories. I know they were emotional. Everyone did an amazing job to be honest of getting through and sharing their stories. We we genuinely appreciate it. Thank you very much. And and with that, this committee will be adjourned. We will be back on. We have 5 bills to here on Thursday. This will probably be our only work session of the session, but we would back to hear five bills Thursday at 8 a.m. And with that we are adjourned. Thank you very much.